/content/drive/MyDrive/NLU assignment1/doc1.pdf
academic programmes rules regulations for students enrolled from july onwards indian institute of technology jodhpur . introduction academic programmes at indian institute of technology jodhpur are designed to develop the highest calibre human resource capable of understanding the new patterns of knowledge creation across disciplines obliterating traditional boundaries between science humanities social sciences and engineering. iit jodhpur aims to produce quality professionals who would be able to address profound and wide ranging societal challenges of the st century such as energy food water housing mobility and health. in addition to imparting scientific knowledge iit jodhpur endeavours to inculcate human qualities of courage integrity fairness humility and team effort among its graduates through curricular co curricular and extra curricular activities on campus. the undergraduate academic programmes focus on developing a temper for the life long process of learning creative thinking and exploring. the postgraduate academic programmes focus on developing a deep understanding of the subject of study coupled with creative inquisitiveness and the ability to address and solve new problems with a free and objective mind. the academic programmes are based on three tenets of semester system credit system and relative grading. these academic programmes are administered by a duly constituted academic committee ac through the office of academics. the ac will be chaired by dean academics . in the absence of dean academics associate dean academics pg associate dean academics ug will discharge the responsibilities of dean academics . the senate of the institute has formulated a set of guidelines and rules to ensure a high standard of performance as well as for smooth functioning of the academic programmes. within this broad set of guidelines subject to the approval of senate different programmes can include additional academic requirements as deemed necessary for that programme. these academic programmes are continuously monitored by the senate and make appropriate modifications improvements as and when necessary. . academic session the academic session normally runs from the end of july in one year to the middle of july in the next year. the academic session is divided into three parts two regular semesters and a summer term as per the following timelines semester i from the fourth week of july to the last week of november semester ii from the last week of december to the last week of april summer term from the middle of may to the middle of july. excluding the days of the examinations the total number of days of instruction in a semester is at least . . academic calendar the academic calendar gives the exact dates of all important events during the academic session such as orientation registration the commencement of classes adding and dropping of courses submission of documents examinations submission of grades project evaluation declaration of results mid semester recess and vacation. this calendar is approved by the senate. . registration a. registration students are required to register for prescribed credits as per the programme on the dates specified in the academic calendar. if the student does not register by the date of registration she he can register by paying the fine and register before the date of late registration. b. provisional registration a fresh student joining the institute who is awaiting the final results of the qualifying examination is allowed to register provisionally on submission of a certificate from her his last institute stating that she he has appeared in the final examination of the qualifying degree. the student is required to submit documents of having passed the qualifying examination by the last date given in the academic calendar for the registration to be regularized. c. late registration if the student does not register by the date of late registration as mentioned in the academic calendar he she will be deregistered. the appeal against deregistration may be made to chairman senate through dean academics. chairman senate may permit the continuation of registration on payment of an appropriate fine. d. adding and dropping of courses a student may add or drop course s with approval of the faculty advisor till the last date of registration. e. withdrawing from a course after the last date of add drop a student will have the option of withdrawing from a course. the last date of course withdrawal will be typically within four weeks from the beginning of the semester as specified in the academic calendar. the withdrawn course will be mentioned in the student s grade card with a letter grade w . f. cancellation of semester registration absence for a period of four or more weeks during a semester shall result in automatic cancellation of the registration of a student from all the courses in that semester. g. summer course registration a department may offer summer courses to enable the students to clear their backlog courses and or regular credit courses. a course will run during summer provided a faculty member s is available for running the course. the course is offered on approval of the dean. . teaching and evaluation . teaching . . medium of instruction the medium of instruction is english. . . course structure all courses have associated credits. credits of a course are based on the number of contact hours for lectures tutorials and practicals a student on successful completion of the course with a passing grade will earn an equivalent number of credits. based on the required academic maturity level of students for attending a course a course is assigned a level. a course can consist of independent components which can be completed independently. these components are called fractals. a course is identified by a unique number. following tables define all parameters related to course numbering scheme. table . course code description course code m e l x x descriptions offering department idrp course type level of courses unique identification number indicates fractal categories see table . see table . see table . this code will be given centrally by the office of academics regular fractal fractal fractal note examples of course codes course title l t p course code regular course engineering mechanics mel xx fractal course robotics mel xx fractal robot modelling mel xx fractal motion planning and programming mel xx fractal robot control mel xx table . departmental code s. n. type department platform office department me mechanical engineering cs computer science and engineering ee electrical engineering ci civil and infrastructure engineering ch chemical engineering bb bioscience and bioengineering mt metallurgical materials engineering cy chemistry ma mathematics ph physics hs humanities and social science interdisciplinary research platforms idrps dh digital humanities ss space science and technology io internet of things and applications av autonomous unmanned vehicles auv qc quantum information and computation cg cognitive science sh smart healthcare others oa office of academics os office of students table . types for courses s. n. course type category l lecture courses other than lecture hours these courses can have tutorial and practical hours e.g. l t p structures etc. p practical practice based courses where performance is evaluated primarily on the basis of practice practical or laboratory work with ltp structures such as etc. d project based courses e.g. major minor mini projects n non graded core component t thesis q seminar courses s independent study r engineering innovation e engineering design graded and non graded table . level of courses category and credit requirements s. n. level category credit requirements courses for b.tech. programmes b.tech. cr b.tech. cr b.tech. cr preparatory courses of m.sc. and m.tech. programmes not open to b.tech. and b.tech. m.tech. dual degree m.tech. cr m. sc. cr courses for m.sc. programmes b.tech. cr m.sc. cr m.tech. cr courses for m.tech. programmes b.tech. cr m.sc. cr m.tech. cr ph.d. cr advanced courses for m.sc. advanced courses for m.tech. and ph.d. programmes an level course should have level course as a pre requisite m.tech. cr ph.d. cr . . approval of courses the senate approves each course along with its weight in terms of credits. only the approved courses may be offered during any semester summer term. . . list of courses the list of courses to be offered in a program is finalized before the beginning of the semester by the department hosting that program. . . categories of courses courses offered can be from one of the following categories a regular course a regular course has hours of classroom engagement per one credit. a regular course can be under elective or core compulsory categories. elective courses of or level will run if a minimum of students registers for the course. a or level elective course can run with a minimum of registered students. a course not running as a regular course may be offered as a self study course as per the following section. b self study course a self study course will be from the list of courses approved by senate. the main features of a self study course are as follows a student may be allowed to register for an elective course as a self study course provided that the course is not running in that semester as a regular course or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. a student may also be permitted to register for a core or program compulsory course in self study mode provided he she has failed in it earlier and the course is not being offered as a regular course during that semester or a student is not on campus during the course with prior approval of the competent authority. students should apply for a self study course with the appropriate recommendation of a course coordinator and dugc drc irc. the final sanction of a self study course to a student is made by the dean academics . formal classroom engagement may not be there for a self study course but laboratory design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course. the course coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester. a self study course will appear with the approved course title on the transcript. not exceeding of the total graded credit can be opted as a self study course. c independent study course independent study enables a student to pursue course credit on an academic topic of interest under the supervision of a faculty member. the term independent does not mean not involving an instructor but independent of regular class engagement. self disciplined and having a sense of own direction and goals are fundamental requirements of an independent study course. a student having cgpa more than or equal to . can opt for independent study courses with the recommendation of supervising professor. the main features of an independent study course are as follows a student may be permitted to register for a topic of interest as an independent study course not exceeding credits in self study mode at most once during the program. such independent study course will be counted toward open elective requirements of the program and will appear with the title independent study on the transcript. students should apply for an independent study course with the appropriate recommendation of a course coordinator and dugc drc irc. the final sanction of an independent study course to a student is made by the dean academics . normally no formal lectures will be held for an independent study course but laboratory design and computation exercises will be conducted if they form an integral part of the course. the course will be arranged planned and managed by a supervising professor. the course coordinator conducts the assessment as per the evaluation norms for the award of letter grade at the end of the semester. . . conduct of courses each course is conducted by the instructor with the assistance of the required number of tutors as needed. the instructor is responsible for conducting the course evaluating the performance of students awarding the grades at the end of the semester and transmitting the grades as per subsection . . the student shall have access to his her answer paper s of all the written examinations conducted for a given course which may be shown to him her by the instructor s concerned. the instructor must keep all evaluation records in his custody at least for the next six months. a course approved by the senate of iit jodhpur can be conducted through either i direct contact ii synchronized remote contact iii guided study mode or combination of these. in direct contact mode coordinator or instructor will have a face to face physical interaction with the students. synchronized remote contact mode would require the faculty and or the students to be concurrently connected to the classroom interaction via electronic conferencing involving both audio and video communication. however there has to be direct interaction between faculty and students for limited hours typically of the stipulated contact hours. in guided study mode a faculty would guide a single or a group of students to take up the study of an approved course via self learning and discussion oriented contact sessions. this mode can be also adopted for enabling a student to take up study of a new course not yet approved by the senate under the supervision of a faculty. all formal evaluation component applicable to courses being run through any one of the above mentioned modes will be conducted under direct physical supervision of a faculty. all laboratory component of a course requiring the use of the specialized facility will be conducted through direct contact. . . teaching assignments the instructors and tutors for all courses to be offered during the semester are allocated by the head of the department hosting the program. when faculty members of other departments are also required to participate in teaching a particular course the allocation shall be done in consultation with the head of that department. . . auditing of courses a student may audit a course in addition to the prescribed academic load requirement with the permission of dean academics on the recommendations of instructor of the course being audited and the faculty advisor. under this arrangement the course will be listed in the grade card of the student. . . attendance requirements a student should have full attendance in each course. unless the student takes leave of absence for valid reasons the student has to attend every lecture tutorial or lab session. the attendance records must be made available to the student after every lecture. even if the student s attendance falls below the student will be allowed to appear for the exams. students not meeting the attendance criterion of will be required to score at least c grade to pass a course. these students would be awarded f grade if their marks are lower than the cut off for c grade in a course. . evaluation the performance of students in a course is evaluated continuously using their interaction in the classroom and performances in examinations the laboratory work if any and term papers and projects. the performance of students in a course is evaluated through examinations and on a continuous basis. the senate will decide from time to time on the system of tests and examinations in each subject in each semester. minor minor and major examinations are mandatory components of the evaluation of a regular week long lecture course. the minor examinations shall be of minutes duration and the major examination of minutes. fractal courses less than credits must have at least one examination. the total weightage of examination component three examinations for a week long course shall be between to of the total weightage of evaluation measure. evaluation policy has to be known from the first day of the class. the continuous evaluation may include but not limited to interaction in the classroom quizzes assignments tutorials laboratory work term papers and projects. . grading system . letter grades at the end of the semester a student is awarded a relative letter grade in each course by the instructor offering the course considering the performance of the student during the semester with respect to those of the other students registered in the course. it is proposed that ten regular letter grades namely a a a b b c c d e and f shall be awarded in each course. each letter grade is associated with a numerical equivalent on a point scale shown in table . . in addition there are four special letter grades namely i s x and u which stand for incomplete satisfactory thesis continuation and unsatisfactory respectively. the faculty member shall upload grade on the portal as per the stipulated time schedule. table . letter grade and its equivalent grade points s.n. letter grade grade points comment a exceptional a outstanding a excellent b very good b good c average c below average d marginal e poor f fail i incomplete s satisfactory in course x thesis continuation u unsatisfactory w withdrawn a detailed description of some of the grades is given below s.n. grades description a a grade has the same grade point as a grade. the grade a indicates exceptional performance and is awarded only in the course s in which the number of registered students is more than . it should not exceed of the total strength of the particular theory or lab course. the grade a is not awarded for projects seminars. e e grade will be awarded to a student who has scored marks less than the cutoff marks for d grade and has met the attendance criterion of the institute. students who obtain an e grade will be eligible to appear in an additional examination. if they perform satisfactorily they become eligible for getting the e grade converted to a d grade otherwise they will continue to have e grade. the student will have only one chance to appear for the additional examination for an e grade. the additional examination will be conducted within the first week of the next semester. the date of additional examination of institute core courses for undergraduate students centrally notified while for all other courses the date would be announced by the respective course coordinators. a student can appear for a maximum of three such additional tests in a given semester. if a student cannot appear for the test due to any reason s he she will not get any additional chance. if a student with e grade in a course does not pass the course through the additional test or obtains an f grade in the course he she has to repeat the course if it is a core course. in case the course is elective the student may take the same course again or any other course. e and f grades are not counted in the calculation of the cgpa however these are taken into account in the calculation of the sgpa. i an i grade is temporarily awarded to a student on his her request to denote incomplete performance in a course on approval of instructor. an i grade is awarded in case missing an evaluation component due to absence on medical grounds or other special circumstances. requests for i grade should be made at the earliest but not later than the last day of major tests. all evaluation requirements for such students in the corresponding course s should be completed before the end of the first week of the next semester. upon completion of all course requirements the i grade is converted to a regular grade. s this grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in non graded and audit courses. if the stipulated requirements are not fulfilled the unsatisfactory u grade is awarded. the grades obtained in an audit course are not considered in the calculation of sgpa or cgpa. x this grade is awarded to a student with satisfactory performance in thesis for continuation u this grade is awarded to a student with unsatisfactory performance in thesis audit or non graded courses. w this grade is awarded to a student who has opted to withdraw from a course. withdrawal from a course is permitted until the date specified in the academics calendar. . procedure for declaration of results the following procedure would be followed for declaration of results and timeline would be as per academic calendar. . evaluation scheme to be displayed by instructors at the start of a semester . display of answer sheets and all scores by instructors. . finalization of grades by instructors . grade moderation by department institute level committee for department institute wide courses . recommendation of grades by the head of the department after scrutiny of grades by a moderation committee . display of grades by instructors . grade correction if any within hours of display of grades after approval of the head of the department . approval of grade by the dean ug pg . finalization of results by the dean ug pg . approval of results by the chairman senate . results once approved cannot be changed under any circumstance. in exceptional cases the student may appeal to the chairman senate for reconsideration with formal justification. . grade point averages . . semester grade point average the semester grade point average sgpa is a weighted average of the grades earned by a student in all the courses credited by her him and reflects her his academic performance in the respective semester. if the grade points associated with the letter grades earned by a student in n courses registered during a semester are g g g n and the corresponding credits c c c n then the sgpa is given by the following formula the sgpa is calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses except audit courses and courses in which s x grade is awarded registered in a particular semester. . . cumulative grade point average the cumulative grade point average cgpa indicates the overall academic performance of a student in all the courses registered up to the latest completed semester. the cgpa is computed similarly as the sgpa considering all the courses in all semesters. the cgpa is calculated on the basis of all pass grades a a a b b c c d except audit courses and courses in which s x grade is awarded obtained in all completed semesters. the sgpa and cgpa calculation are based on credits earned completed at iit jodhpur alone. . grade card and transcript a grade card shall be issued to each student at the end of each semester and a transcript at the end of the programme. iit jodhpur grade card and transcript will only indicate the courses credits and grades completed at iit jodhpur and the total number of credits without grades earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester if applicable. . waiver of requirements in special cases the rules and regulations procedures and requirements stated in this manual other than those related to admissions to the academic programmes may be waived in special circumstances by the ac on the recommendation of the department with the approval of chairman senate. all such exceptions have to be reported to the senate. . make up examinations a student who has missed minor s or the major examination due to genuine reasons like illness etc. may be permitted to write a make up examination for the missed components. the student should make an application to the dean academics through the course instructor within ten days from the date of the examination missed explaining the reasons for their absence. applications received after this period need not be entertained. the permission to take a make up examination will be given under exceptional circumstances such as admission to a hospital due to illness. a student needs to produce the necessary document subject to one of the following categories students residing in the hostels should produce a medical certificate issued by the medical officer of the institute that he she was admitted to the hospital during the period of the missed quiz exam. students residing in the hostels and taking medical consultation with outside doctors are required to obtain written permission from the medical officer of the institute hospital before they proceed for such consultation. students residing in the hostels but taking medical consultation with outside doctors are required to obtain an endorsement on the certificate of treatment by the medical officer of the institute hospital. a student staying outside the campus permanently temporarily must produce a medical certificate from the registered medical practitioner and the same should be duly endorsed by the parent guardian. a slot wise make up examination for major will be held during the makeup supplementary week as per academic calendar of the subsequent semester for those who are permitted to take the make up examination. a student who misses this make up examination will not normally be given another make up examination. however in exceptional cases of prolonged illness resulting in the student missing a make up examination the chairman of the senate in consultation with the dean of academics may permit the student to appear for make up examination any day before the end of the first week of the next semester. under no circumstances prorating can be done for the missed examinations or attendance. a. regulations for undergraduate programmes . undergraduate programmes iit jodhpur currently offers bachelor of technology b. tech. programs and capability linked opportunities for undergraduate students to complete minor interdisciplinary area specializations or department area specialization. a student can also opt for m.tech. dual degree in departmental area or minor in entrepreneurship leading to m.tech. in entrepreneurship or department area specialization in engineering innovation. . undergraduate admissions . b.tech. programmes . . general admissions admissions to the b.tech. programmes are made once a year in july through the all india level joint entrance examination jee conducted by iits. the procedures and other requirements for admission are specified in the jee information brochure brought out every year. . . cultural exchange programmes admissions are also offered to foreign nationals under the cultural exchange fellowship program of the government of india administered by indian council of cultural relations iccr new delhi. persons interested in these programs are required to apply through the indian high commission embassy in their respective countries. . . change enhancement of program a student already admitted to a b.tech. programme may switch to another department through branch change. a student can enhance his her programme to a minor interdisciplinary area specialization leading to m. tech. in minor interdisciplinary area major department area specialization leading to m. tech. in department area minor in entrepreneurship minor in entrepreneurship leading to m. tech. in entrepreneurship and department area specialization in engineering innovation through industrial translation . the rules governing these changes are given in section branch change and section . for all others . . reservation policy the reservation policy of government of india will be followed. . student exchange program student exchange program provides for a one two semester visit by students between the two academic institutions on a reciprocal basis. the visiting student must be a full time student enrolled in a degree program in their home institution. the exchange program is open to full time undergraduate and graduate students of each home institution. it will be executed as per the pre approved arrangement including an mou between the institutions. selection of students under such program will be made by the dugc after assessing the preparedness of students to meet the requirements of the planned coursework research at the host institution and the relevance of the planned coursework research to the enrolled degree program. a visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities as per pre approved arrangement including an mou . under exchange program a student of iit jodhpur can register at another academic institution in india or abroad with the expectation of credit transfer up to credits per semester in lieu of the course work or research work through a pre approved arrangement including an mou. on return the student may apply to dugc for waiver of credits from her his program requirements which s he thinks are equivalent to the courses successfully completed at the visited academic institution as an exchange student. with the application the student must submit an official transcript of the grades obtained by her him at the visited academic institution as an exchange student and other documents material that the concerned dugc may require for evaluation. the dugc will determine by whatever means it deems fit the equivalent credits requirements for which the student may be given a waiver in her his programme at iit jodhpur. dugc will submit its recommendations to course equivalence committee for its approval. moreover the credits grades indicated in the grade sheet obtained from the academic institution in which the student has completed the courses should be used by the student as part of his her transcripts. iit jodhpur transcripts will only indicate the courses credits and grades completed at iit jodhpur and the total number of credits without grades earned in other academic institutions in a particular semester. the cgpa calculation based on credits earned completed at iit jodhpur alone is to be considered for award of prizes. the credits earned at the visited academic institutions will be taken into account for the calculation of minimum required credits for the award of the degree. . visiting students a visiting student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in india or abroad and who is officially permitted by that institute or university to complete part of his her academic requirements at iit jodhpur. for that purpose the visiting student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities. a person can be admitted as a visiting student on a duly sponsored application to the dean academics . a visiting student may be admitted for a maximum period of one year. a visiting student will be required to pay all applicable fees depending upon the status program and nationality. students so admitted also will be governed by all rules regulations and discipline applicable to regular students of the institute. . cancellation of admission students admitted provisionally or otherwise to any program shall submit copies of their mark sheets provisional certificates etc. of the qualifying examination and other documents by the last date specified for the purpose in the academic calendar. the senate reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student who fails to submit the prescribed documents by the specified date or to meet other stipulated requirement s . also the senate reserves the right to cancel the admission at any later time if it is found that the student had provided some false information or suppressed relevant information while seeking admission. . fulfillment of admission requirements admission to any undergraduate program requires that the applicant be eligible go through the laid down admission procedure and pay the prescribed fees. the senate should formally approve all admissions to the undergraduate programmes. . curriculum and academic requirements . academic load calculation of credits for a course for ug programmes the total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures tutorial and practical hours l t p assigned as given in table . . each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self learning hours on an average to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. table . ltp structure and credit assignment. type l t p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture hour of tutorial hour of lab . . . hour of project contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory discussion etc. . capability linked opportunities for undergraduate students a b.tech. student can opt for one of the following capabilities linked opportunities major department specialization interdisciplinary specialization minor b.tech. m.tech. dual degree . . eligibility criteria for opting a major department specialization minor interdisciplinary specialization a student should have earned a minimum credits with the cgpa more than or equal to . at the end on th semester to opt for capability linked opportunity. b b.tech. m.tech. dual degree in the chosen specialization students who have already opted for major department specialization minor interdisciplinary specialization can opt for dual degree programme from the eighth semester provided they have earned minimum credits with at least cgpa at the end of the th semester. . . minimum credit requirements a major department specialization interdisciplinary specialization and minor a student needs to complete a total of credits in the major department specialization or minor interdisciplinary specialization area offered. credits out of can be taken up as a part of open electives whereas the student is required to opt for an additional credits in the form of course overload. this will be indicated on the degree. registration for additional courses for major department specialization interdisciplinary specialization and minor starting from the sixth semester students having earned credits with cgpa more than or equal to . are permitted to take up to extra credits as part of their normal load which forms part of her his additional learning component every semester in addition to the prescribed courses for their degree. b b.tech. m.tech. dual degree in the chosen specialization a student needs to complete a total of credits in the minor department or interdisciplinary area offered. it will include credits earned for major department or minor interdisciplinary area specialization excluding the project credits. . course categories and academic requirements for various programmes course categories and academic requirements for various programmes are given in the table below table . course categories and academic requirements s.n . course type course category b.tech. regular b.tech. with specialization dual degree institute core i engineering ie science is humanities ih programme linked l science ls programme core p programme compulsory pc programme electives pe b.tech. project pp open o electives oe specialization major minor department interdisciplinary s compulsory sc elective se m.tech. m in minor department or interdisciplinary area compulsory mc electives me project mp open electives mo total graded non graded n humanities nh engineering ne design practical experience nd total graded non graded must not include any project course . maximum duration of the program the maximum duration for the completion b.tech. programs shall be registered semesters. . academic performance requirements the minimum requirements on credits earned for continuation in a b. tech. programme at the end of the second registered semester is specified in the following table table . criteria for continuation at the end of the second registered semester description minimum number of credits to be earned gen obc gen ews sc st pd minimum for continuation if a student does not meet the criteria specified in table . he she may opt to restart the programme or else their registration will be terminated. the restart will be permitted only once. dean ug pg should propose a guideline for mentoring the student under probation. dean of students should also involve in the process. if a student chooses to restart after the first two registered semesters then the credits earned and semesters registered till that point will not be counted towards the graduation requirements. the re start will be indicated on the transcript. . . criteria to put a student on academic probation from the third semester onward if a student fails to earn a minimum of credits in any registered semester then he she will be placed on academic probation. a student placed on probation shall be monitored including mandatory attendance in classes special tutorials and mentoring. mentoring would comprise structured guidance under a senior student. if a student is on academic probation for two consecutive registered semesters then his her registration will be terminated. if a student earns less than or equal to credits in any registered semester a warning shall be given to him her and intimation be sent to the parents. the two semesters allowed for the academic probation should be counted towards the total duration allowed for the program. . assistantship for b.tech. m. tech. dual degree programmes the students of dual degree programmes will be considered for award of institute research teaching assistantship if they have earned credits by the end of the eighth semester. only those students who have either qualified gate or have a cgpa more than . will be eligible for this assistantship. the assistantship will be provided for a maximum period of months beginning from the summer semester following the eighth semester provided the student is registered for m.tech. major project in that semester. a student availing assistantship will be required to provide hours of assistance per week besides his her normal academic work. for continuation of assistantship a student will need to secure sgpa of . . a student receiving assistantship will be eligible for a total of days leave during the month period. he she will not be entitled to mid semester breaks winter and summer vacations. . ug registration . summer courses students can register for courses during summer up to a maximum of eight credits on payment of registration fee at prescribed rates. the summer term is not a regular semester and only academically deficient students who have low cgpa and or fewer credits than advised by the curriculum till that point in the programme major students minor students and such students who are short of maximum eight credits to complete all graduation requirements may register during this period. for core courses only students with failed backlog may be considered for summer registration. in case any vacancies are left in the courses being offered during the summer term once the requirements of the above categories of students are fulfilled other students may register for these courses to fulfil some of their graduation requirements in advance. the total number of contact hours for the courses remains the same as that during the regular semesters and therefore the courses run at an accelerated pace. the evaluation and grading patterns also remain the same as during the regular semesters. . limits on registration an undergraduate student should register for a minimum of credits in a semester. the maximum number of credits permitted for a ug student in a semester is . an undergraduate student may be permitted to register for a maximum of four credits per semester for independent study or self study course . exceptions to regular rules regarding academic load under load students who are identified as academically deficient on academic probation may register for a maximum of credits. over load overloading may be allowed only for students who are not on academic probation and satisfy one of the following criteria students are allowed to overload only when they need or less additional credits to complete all the requirements of their programme. beyond the second semester any student with a cgpa of . or higher may be allowed to overload. . change of registration from b. tech. programme to b.tech. m. tech. dual degree programme a b.tech. student having opted for major minor specialization with cgpa or more at the end of the seventh semester and fulfilling requirements mentioned earlier may be allowed to switch to b.tech. m. tech. dual degree program in the chosen specialization at the beginning of the eighth semester. the m.tech degree can be any one of the approved programmes of the institute. all requirements of m.tech. degree will be applicable to all such students. all such changes of registration shall be reported to the senate. . evaluation of special ug only courses . b.tech. project evaluation dugc will appoint a committee for b.tech. project evaluation. the committee will ensure that award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy. the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva voce examination on the project. dugc will form the evaluation criterion and declare it to students. . composition of department undergraduate committee dugc the dugc will be constituted of all ug faculty advisors and head of department. the head of department will be the chairperson and one of the faculty advisors would be the convenor. . engineering innovation at the completion of an engineering innovation project the student will submit a report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner s by dugc. the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva voce examination on the project entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded. evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of the class. . design project evaluation at the completion of a project the student will submit a project report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner s by dugc. the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva voce examination on the project and s or u grade is awarded. evaluation policy has to be declared by the concerned department from the first day of the class. . conduct and evaluation of b.tech. m. tech dual degree project allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . the supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the eighth semester. coordinator m. tech. program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor s . the evaluation criterion would be the same as section . . entrepreneurship project at the completion of entrepreneurship the student will submit a report which will be evaluated by duly appointed examiner s by dean academics ug associate dean academics ug . the evaluation will be based on the report and a viva voce examination on the entrepreneurship and a letter grade is awarded. . termination . termination from b.tech. program a student may be terminated from the b.tech. programme by ac if the student a is absent without authorized leave of absence for eight weeks or more in a semester or b fails to report and register by the last date of registration without a bonafide reason or c violates the code of conduct involves in ragging etc. as confirmed by a committee constituted for the purpose or d does not earn the prescribed minimum number of credits within the maximum duration of the program or e is on academic probation for two consecutive semesters. . appeal against termination a student who is terminated from the b.tech. program can appeal to the chairman senate for reconsideration. while making such an appeal the student is expected to give reasons for poor academic performance and or why the termination should be reconsidered. the senate shall take a final decision after considering all the available inputs. but the senate will not entertain any further appeal for review unless substantial additional information is brought to its notice. . leave rules application for leave of absence should be addressed to the convener dugc and submitted with a medical certificate if applicable. usually leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the dugc. . mid semester recess and vacation undergraduate students are entitled to avail of mid semester recess and vacation as specified in the academic calendar. . short leave a student may be granted leave of absence during the semester for a maximum of days on medical grounds and for days for any other valid reason. . semester withdrawal it may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. dugc can approve and intimate office of academics regarding the leave of the student for records. in case the leave extends beyond a semester it can only be approved through the academic committee. semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student. . academic leave to help students broaden their horizons and gain course work experience she he may be permitted to proceed to other academic institutes industry r d organization in india or abroad. academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons such as a fieldwork b experimental work training using specialized facility not available at iitj c entrepreneurship initiative d engineering innovation e exchange program as part of an exchange program with an academic institution in india or abroad f internship work all such requests must be evaluated and approved by dugc before the leave is granted. a student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one summer term and two semesters on academic leave. a student during academic leave can earn a maximum of credits per semester as certified by the dugc and approved by the course equivalence committee. . branch change a an undergraduate student is eligible to apply for branch change at the end of the second semester only provided the student satisfies the following criteria . secured a cgpa at the end of the second semester of i. greater than or equal to . for sc st and pd applicants ii. greater than or equal to . for other applicants . completed all prescribed course credits for the first two semesters including the non graded courses . . no backlog at the end of the second semester. b the student should have no disciplinary action against him her. c change of the branch will be permitted strictly in the order of merit as determined by cgpa at the end of the second semester. each available seat may be occupied by students of any category. for students of sc st pd category concession in eligibility criteria is given as per rule a . d in case more than one student applying for branch change have the same cgpa the tie shall be resolved on the basis of jee ranks of such applicants. e in making a change of branch the strength of a branch should not fall below of the sanctioned strength and should not go above of the sanctioned strength. f the conditions mentioned in item a above will not be insisted upon for change to a branch in which a vacancy exists with reference to the sanctioned strengths and the concerned student was eligible as per jee rank for admission to that branch at the time of entry to iit jodhpur. g notwithstanding any of the conditions listed above a student with cgpa of or more at the end of the second semester will be allowed to move to a branch of his her choice. . requirements for graduation a student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she he has met the conditions laid down in clauses . to . . . minimum duration of residence minimum duration of residence is given in the table below table . minimum residential requirement s.no. program minimum duration of residence in semesters . b. tech. including minor department interdisciplinary area specialization . b. tech. m.tech. . academic the student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she he has earned the minimum credits as per table . in section . for all degrees . . payment of fees and dues the degree will be awarded after obtaining no dues clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by dean academics . . no case of disciplinary action the student shall not be considered to have completed the academic requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her him. . completion of engagement in ncc nss or nso the student should have completed extra curricular activity like performing arts sports national cadet corps national service schemes and national sports organisation for a period of at least two semesters during their b.tech. program. . award of degrees . . provisional certificate a student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . can be provided a provisional certificate by the office of dean academics on the approval of chairman senate. certificate will have mention of major minor department or interdisciplinary specialization wherever applicable. . . degree certificate a student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . is recommended by the senate to the board of governors bog for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. the degree can be awarded only after the bog accords its approval. the certificate will have mention of major minor department or interdisciplinary specialization wherever applicable. . amendments notwithstanding anything contained in this document the senate of iit jodhpur reserves the right to modify amend without notice the curricula procedures requirements and rules pertaining to its b.tech. programs. b. regulations for postgraduate programmes . postgraduate programmes the indian institute of technology jodhpur currently offers the following postgraduate programmes. . master of science m.sc. . dual degree m.sc. m.tech. . master of technology m.tech. . dual degree m.tech. phd. . doctor of philosophy ph.d. . postgraduate admissions the process of admission for all the programs offered by the institute normally is underway during april may for semester and during november december for semester . in addition the department may process applications for admissions to phd programs on a continuous basis and admit students as per the existing procedure. . categories of admission a candidate can be admitted in any one of the following categories i. full time regular ii. full time sponsored iii. part time iv. external v. executive however all categories are not applicable for all pg programs. further programmes can be offered in a combination of these modes like fully sponsored part time program . i full time regular in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. a student supported by a project of the institute will be considered a full time regular student. ii full time sponsored in campus student who can register for up to full credit permissible per semester. the candidate is sponsored either by his her employer or by self. a self sponsored candidate must have two years of relevant industrial r d academic experience. iii part time a part time student is a working professional who while employed attend regular classes as per the schedule of the institute. the student must be employed in the neighbourhood of iit jodhpur. the student must produce a noc from the employer for pursuing the programme at iit jodhpur. the student can register only for a limited number of credits as compared to a full time regular student. iv external a student working in an industry r d establishment academic institution which is equipped with the necessary research and library facilities. the employer must relieve the student to stay in the campus to complete the minimum residency requirements. v executive only for m. tech. a professional who can carry out complete the programme requirement in . an accelerated fashion minimum in months or . accumulates credits as per convenience and petitions a degree in a maximum of years. . the part time or full time mode by attending courses offered in synchronized remote contact mode and limited direct interaction . eligibility for admission a the eligibility conditions given below are the absolute minimum. departments may prescribe any requirements over and above subject to the approval of the senate. b the number of admissions that can be made to any program shall be decided by the senate from time to time. c reservation of seats for various reserved categories shall be prescribed by the board of governors. . . admission to m. sc. program regular the admission to the m.sc. programs offered by the institute will be through any one of the following two avenues. a the applicants qualified through the joint admission test for master jam organized by iits. b the applicants having a bachelor s degree in any relevant discipline or year program may be admitted based on written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. the applicants under the category b must have a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. . . admission to m sc m tech dual degree program regular the admission to the m. sc. m.tech. dual degree programs offered by the institute will be through any one of the following two avenues. a the applicants qualified through the joint admission test for master jam organized by iits. b the applicants having a bachelor s degree in any relevant discipline or year program may be admitted based on written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. the applicants under the category b must have a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. . . admission to m tech program regular a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science mca pharmacy medical sciences agricultural sciences and veterinary sciences or in a related field b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must either have a valid gate score or exempted from gate as per mhrd circular or have qualified an equivalent national examination or have qualified in the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to mtech program executive part time external sponsored a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science mca pharmacy medical science agricultural science and veterinary science or in a related field. b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience after qualifying degree in industry r d laboratories academic institutions at the time of registration to the program. however the credit accumulation for the program may start immediately after the qualifying degree. petitioning for the degree can happen only year after registration. d the applicant must qualify the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to m .tech. ph.d. dual degree program regular a the applicant must have bachelor s degree in engineering or science year program or a master s degree in science mca pharmacy medical science agricultural science and veterinary science or in a related field b a minimum of marks for gen obc for sc st category in aggregate or as specified by the university institute or a minimum cgpa of . for gen obc . for sc st category on the scale of with corresponding proportional requirements when the scales are other than on for example . for gen obc category . for sc st on a scale of or a first class as specified by the university institute. c the applicant must either have a valid gate score or exempted from gate as per mhrd circular or have qualified an equivalent national examination or have qualified in the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . . admission to ph.d. program regular a candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in india or abroad and shall not be a full time or part time employee of any organization in india or abroad. b the applicant must have a master s degree in engineering pharmacy agricultural science science humanities social sciences management with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen ews obc for sc st or c the applicant must have mbbs with md ms bvsc with mvsc bds with mds bpth with mpth both with moth or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen ews obc for sc st in bachelor s degree or d the applicant must have a bachelor s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen obc for sc st . . . admission under any special scheme like quality improvement programme qip defence personnel the procedures and criteria for admission of these candidates can be decided with the approval of chairman senate. . . . admission of indian nationals residing abroad inra and foreign nationals inra candidates must have been residing abroad continuously for at least one year at the time of applying for admission. the applications of inra and foreign nationals may be processed by the departments as and when they are received or according to any schedule convenient to the department. the applications should be scrutinized to make sure that both in terms of qualifications and attainment they are comparable with the candidates admitted in the general category. department will conduct vc based interview for ascertaining suitability of the candidate. the applications of foreign nationals who are sponsored by the indian council of cultural relations iccr will be scrutinized by the department concerned to assess their suitability for admission to the programme. the department s recommendation will be sent to the chairperson senate through the chairperson ac. . . admission to ph.d sponsored external part time a candidates admitted in this category shall not be a registered student in any other academic program in india or abroad. b the applicant must have a master s degree in engineering pharmacy agricultural science science humanities social sciences management with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen ews obc for sc st or c the applicant must have mbbs with md ms bvsc with mvsc bds with mds bpth with mpth both with moth or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen gen ews obc for sc st in bachelor s degree or d the applicant must have a bachelor s degree of minimum four year duration in engineering or science or medicine or pharmacy or agricultural science or veterinary science or equivalent with at least marks or at least . cpi or cgpa for gen obc for sc st . e the applicant must have a minimum of two years of work experience after qualifying degree in industry r d laboratories academic institutions at the time of registration to the program. f the applicant must qualify the written test and or interview conducted by iit jodhpur. . admission of non degree students a non degree student is a student who is registered for a degree in a recognized institute or university in india or abroad and who is officially sponsored by that institute or university to complete part of his her academic requirements at iit jodhpur. for that purpose the non degree student may carry out research or take courses for credit or otherwise or may use other academic facilities. any candidate can be admitted as a casual student for specific courses provided the candidate satisfies the minimum eligibility criteria specified in section . . the application must be routed through the office of dean r d. students so admitted will be governed by all rules regulations and discipline of the institute. . reservation policy the reservation policy of government of india will be followed. pg registration . limits on registration maximum and minimum number of credits a student can register in different programs m.sc. an m.sc. student can register for a maximum of credits and a minimum of credits in a semester. m.tech. an m.tech. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per table . . table . maximum and minimum credits an m.tech. student can register for during the regular semester summer term m.tech. student registered under different categories maximum credits minimum credits regular semester executive accelerated executive normal executive slow paced executive part time full time regular sponsored external part time summer term executive accelerated executive normal executive slow paced full time regular full time sponsored external part time m.tech. ph.d. dual degree direct ph.d. joining after b.tech. the maximum and minimum credits that an m.tech. ph.d. dual degree student can register are equivalent to that of an m.tech. regular external part time student. ph.d. a ph.d. student can register for maximum and minimum credits as per table . . table . maximum and minimum credits a ph.d. student regular can register for during the regular semester ph.d. student registered under different categories maximum credits minimum credits full time regular external part time . . registration kept alive rka a student admitted to an m.tech program who has at least completed minimum credit requirement of the first semester can keep his studentship alive while he is pursuing any professional activity by opting for rka in subsequent semesters. the candidate must indicate his intent of rka before the last date of late registration through drc to dean academic . the candidate has to pay appropriate registration fees for rka status. a student can maintain rka status for a maximum of semesters. . change of registration from m.tech. programme to m.tech. ph.d. dual degree programme a regular student registered for the m.tech. programme having cgpa or more at the end of the second semester may be allowed to switch to m.tech. ph.d. dual degree program till the end of the third semester. as a special case a student can switch to a dual degree in the fourth semester with the approval of drc provided his her cgpa is or more who will then be required to complete his her candidacy requirements by the end of the fifth semester. all conditions of m.tech. ph.d. dual degree program will be applicable to all such students. all such changes of registration shall be reported to the senate. . change of registration from part time m.tech. to part time ph.d. program a part time m.tech. student having cgpa or more after completion of at least credits may be allowed to change his her registration to the ph.d. program. the credits earned will be counted towards his her ph.d. course work requirements. . change of registration from full time to part time external ph.d. programme a student admitted to a full time ph.d. programme may be permitted to change to a part time ph.d. programme. a student requesting such a conversion must i have successfully completed his her candidacy requirement ii get the request endorsed by the supervisor s and the drc iii produce a no objection certificate from his her employer for carrying out the research work. . maximum duration of a program m.sc. registered semester m.tech. regular and part time external executive registered semesters which may include maximum semesters of registration kept alive rka after completion of the first semester. tuition fee post rka will be same as that of sponsored candidates. ph.d. and m.tech. ph.d. dual degree regular and part time external registered semesters which may include maximum semesters of registration kept alive rka after completion of the two semesters. tuition fee post rka will be same as that of sponsored candidates. students may request for rka to dean academics through drc. . course registration students will be eligible to register for courses as per the criterion specified in section . and table . . the drc irc must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during her his masters or bachelors program. academic requirements . academic load calculation of credits for a course for pg programmes the total credits for a course are calculated by taking into account the number of lectures tutorial and practical hours l t p assigned as given in table . and . for m.sc. and m.tech. ph.d. programmes respectively. each credit is associated with the number of contact hours and the expected number of self learning hours on an average to be spent by the student for each contact hour to meet academic demand of the course. table . ltp structure and credit assignment for m.sc. type l t p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture hour of tutorial hour of lab . . . hour of project contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory discussion etc. table . ltp structure and credit assignment for m.tech. ph.d. type l t p distribution of contact and beyond contact hours total credits tc th contact hours ch beyond contact hours bch total hours th hour of lecture hour of tutorial hour of lab . hour of project hour of thesis ph.d. contact hour for project refers to the involvement of students in the laboratory discussion etc. . course categories for masters programmes compulsory course mc programme elective me open elective mo project works mp non graded ng . academic credit requirements for m.sc. students course categories and academic requirements for m.sc. students are given below in table . . table . programs credits to be earned for msc students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp total m.sc. chemistry m.sc. mathematics m.sc. physics . academic credit requirements for m.tech. students executive m.tech. course categories and academic requirements for m.tech. students are given below in table . . table . minimum credits to be earned for mtech students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp ng total m.tech sensors and internet of things m.tech cyber physical system m.tech thermofluids engineering m.tech advanced manufacturing engineering and design m.tech metallurgical and materials engineering m.tech artificial intelligence m.tech computer science and engineering m.tech bioscience and bioengineering m.tech data and computational sciences . academic credit requirements for m.sc. m.tech. dual degree minimum credit requirements for m.sc. m.tech. dual degree is the cumulative sum of credit requirements for respective m.sc. program and m.tech. program as mentioned in sections . and . . . academic credit requirements for m.tech. ph.d. dual degree course categories and academic requirements for mtech phd dual degree students are given below in table . . table . minimum credits to be earned for dual degree mtech and phd students programs minimum credits to be earned mc me mo mp ng total m.tech ph.d dual degree sensors and internet of things m.tech ph.d dual degree cyber physical system m.tech ph.d dual degree communication and signal processing m.tech ph.d dual degree thermofluids engineering m.tech ph.d dual degree manufacturing engineering m.tech ph.d dual degree design engineering m.tech ph.d dual degree metallurgical and materials engineering m.tech ph.d dual degree computer science and engineering m.tech ph.d dual degree artificial intelligence m.tech ph.d dual degree bioscience and bioengineering the drc irc must oversee that the student has not registered for a similar course during bachelors program and take necessary corrective action by suggesting alternative courses . academic credit requirements for ph.d. students the minimum credits to be earned through courses is listed in table . . table . credit requirements for phd students s.no. ph.d. in with minimum credits through course work minimum credits through thesis work . engineering discipline idrps m.tech. m.e. or m.sc. engineering in an engineering discipline m.sc. degree in a science discipline b.tech. b.e. or b.sc. engineering in an engineering discipline . science humanities or social science discipline m.sc. m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science humanities or social science discipline . academic performance requirements . . minimum performance for continuation and graduation in a program the minimum cgpa requirement for continuation and graduation in a program is given in below table . . table . minimum cgpa requirements sr. no. program continuation in programme for graduation m.sc. only graduation requirement refer . . . m.tech. . . dual degree m.sc. and m.tech. . . dual degree m.tech. and ph.d. . . ph.d. . . at the completion of course work . . continuing criteria for m.sc. m.sc. the student must earn at least credits at the end of the second semester for continuation in the program. . . minimum performance for continuation assistantship fellowship the minimum cgpa requirement for continuation assistantship fellowship is given in below table . table . minimum cgpa requirements for continuation of assistantship fellowship sr. no. program continuation of assistantship fellowship m.tech. . dual degree m.tech. and ph.d. . ph.d. . . leave rules application for leave of absence should be addressed to the convener drc and submitted with a medical certificate if applicable. usually leave must not be availed of without prior approval of the drc. . leave a maximum of days in an academic year including leave on medical grounds mid semester break . the student must apply for leave in advance even during the summer winter term or mid semester break. a phd student cannot avail leave for more than days at a stretch an m.tech. m.sc. student cannot avail leave for more than days at a stretch the leave beyond days in an academic year may be granted in exceptional cases by drc without assistantship during that period. . other leaves maternity leave for ph.d. students is sanctioned as per the directives of mhrd. it will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme. any other leave may also be permissible as per the guidelines of mhrd. . semester withdrawal may be applicable in unforeseen circumstances or for medical reasons. absence for a period of four or more weeks in any semester will result in automatic withdrawal from that semester. in all such cases the fellowship will be stopped with immediate effect and it will be continued for only after the student rejoins the institute. drc can approve and intimate office of academics regarding the leave of the student for records. in case the leave extends beyond a semester it can only be approved through the academic committee. semester withdrawal on the medical ground will not be counted towards the maximum permissible duration of the programme for the student. . academic leave academic leave can be requested for any of the following reasons such as . fieldwork . library work because of a specialized collection at a particular library . experimental work training using specialized facility not available at iitj . attending conferences workshops summer winter schools symposium . collaborative work as part of joint m.tech. ph.d. supervision . collaborative work for a specific problem related to his ongoing ph.d programme as indicated in his research proposal . exchange program as part of an exchange program with a sister institution in india or abroad all such requests must be evaluated and approved by src drc irc before the leave is granted. src drc irc must also make recommendations regarding continuation of fellowship during academic leave. a student may be allowed to spend a maximum duration of one year on academic leave. a student during academic leave can earn a maximum of credits per semester as certified by src and approved by drc. . financial assistance financial assistantship scholarship will be provided to the eligible students admitted under regular full time program. the eligibility criteria are as per the following . m.sc. program merit cum means fellowship as per institute norms. . m.sc. m.tech. dual degree program a student having completed minimum credit requirements of an m.sc. program at the end of the second year with a cgpa or b have qualified gate can have financial support from mhrd or project fund. . m.tech. program a regular m.tech. student with gate can have financial support from mhrd or project fund. a student may be exempted from gate as per mhrd guidelines. . executive m tech program students admitted in this category will not be provided any financial assistance from the institute. . m.tech. ph.d. dual degree program rules and regulations governing financial assistance for dual degree students will be at par with regular ph.d. students. . ph.d. program a regular ph.d. student admitted to the institute will be eligible for financial assistance as per the norms of iit jodhpur. a a candidate having b.tech. b.s. four year program master s degree with gate net jrf nbhm or equivalent can have financial assistance as per mhrd norms or equivalent applicable for non science departments. b the requirement of gate is exempted for an applicant with m.tech or equivalent post bachelor s degree c a student may be exempted from gate as per mhrd guidelines. a ph.d. student would be eligible for enhancement in the scholarship after two years provided the student has met qualifier requirement. the enhanced fellowship will commence from the date of completion of both the conditions. no arrears will be provided due to delay in completing the qualifier requirement. the teaching research assistantship of a ph.d. student shall stop from the day of submission of the thesis. . rules and regulation for conduct and evaluation of m. tech. m.sc. project allotment of students to supervisors will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . the supervisor and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester. coordinator m. tech. program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor s . each semester a letter grade will be awarded after examination by a committee consisting of drc supervisor s and two members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department maybe outside the institute also . drc will appoint examiners in consultation with the supervisor. the same committee may examine more than one thesis. external member can be on vc. drc will ensure that award of letter grade would be as per relative grading policy. a regular full time student must register for m.tech project part in the summer semester following nd semester. he must obtain a satisfactory grade to continue m.tech project part in the next semester. his performance in the summer semester will be evaluated by his supervisor. rules and regulations for ph. d. m. tech. ph. d. dual degree program . thesis supervisor s . . selection of ph.d. candidates the selection should be based on merit and capability of the candidate to conduct research. there should at least be a faculty member available or likely to join in the areas of interest of the candidate at the time of selection. . . appointment of thesis supervisor s ph. d. students shall be admitted in the department and no supervisor shall be assigned at the time of selection. allotment of students to supervisor s will be made based on the preferences of the students and supervisor s . for both ph. d. and m. tech. ph. d. dual degree supervisor s and area identification must be completed by the end of the first semester the convener drc department research committee coordinator interdisciplinary research program would advise until the student is assigned to a regular supervisor s . there shall not be more than two supervisors in general for a student. additional supervisor can be allowed with the approval of chairman senate. a supervisor from outside the institute before the qualifier may be appointed on the request of student supervisor s with the recommendation of the drc irc and the dean academics and approval of the chairman senate. the external supervisor will be requested to sign intellectual property right ipr and non disclosure agreement nda documents as a part of acceptance. from the financial point of view the institute will have no obligation to the external supervisor. . . caretaker supervisor additional supervisor whenever the supervisor proceeds on short leave for a period up to one year the drc irc interdisciplinary research committee shall appoint a caretaker supervisor in consultation with the supervisor and the student to take care of the administrative requirements. whenever the supervisor proceeds on long leave for a period more than a year then an additional supervisor needs to be appointed on the suggestion of the supervisor. the supervisor going on lien or sabbatical may continue supervising students and the supervisor can opt for either an additional supervisor or a caretaker supervisor. the supervisor on his her retirement or on resignation may continue as a supervisor and will have to opt for an additional supervisor provided the student has cleared qualifier before the supervisor s retirement resignation. . . composition of departmental research committee drc the drc will consist of coordinators of m.tech m.tech. ph.d. dual degree and ph.d. programs of the department head of the department and senior professor associate professor proposed by the head. the drc will be chaired by professor associate professor nominated by head of the department. the chairman of the drc will be a member of the academic committee. the drc has to be approved by dean academics . ph.d. program coordinator will be the convenor of drc and will be proposed by the head. the tenure for the drc will be years. . . composition of interdisciplinary research committee irc the irc will consist of all coordinators of idrps and senior professor associate professor as the chairman of the irc will be nominated by dean academics . the chairman of irc will be a member of ac. one of the idrp co ordinators would be convenor of the committee. the tenure for the irc will be years. the irc will be approved by the dean academics . . change of research supervisor change of supervisor s under exceptional circumstances shall be permitted by dean academics on the recommendation of the drc irc after obtaining the consent of i the student ii the present supervisor s and iii the proposed supervisor s . if required realignment of student s research program will happen under the supervision of the drc irc. . student research committee src . . composition of src the src will normally consist of supervisor s and three other faculty members conversant with the field of research with at least one member external to the department maybe outside the institute also . a student research committee src for the candidate shall be proposed by the supervisor s recommended by the drc irc and approved by dean academics . the src shall have one member identified as chairman for administrative functions and the supervisor s will act as convener. chairman src is to be appointed by dean academics . the appointment of src should be completed by the end of the first semester. any subsequent changes in the composition of src shall be communicated through the drc irc to dean academics for record. chairman and supervisor s shall be the internal examiners for the evaluation of the thesis. the src is expected to monitor the progress of the candidate until the completion of the program. . annual progress monitoring meeting apm the academic progress of all registered ph.d. students will be reviewed once in a year by the src and peers in the institute. the review will be based upon i annual progress report and ii a poster presentation open to all. src will award a satisfactory non satisfactory grade based upon i and ii . two consecutive non satisfactory grades will lead to termination of registration. for implementational convenience academic calendar must indicate two days in a year for conducting annual progress evaluation of research scholars. following the groupings of students and scheduling guidelines are suggested . for students joining in st semester of ay during st july to th september of the year. . for students joining in nd semester of ay during st december to th february of the year. the first apm will be conducted after the successful completion of qualifier requirements. each semester satisfactory progress or unsatisfactory progress will be reported by the supervisor s through the src for record. any situation in exception to the above will be processed by the academic committee and approved by dean academics . qualifier requirements of ph.d. student the following four components together will constitute qualifier candidacy requirements for a ph. d. student and for a ph. d. candidate to be eligible for the enhanced srf fellowship. . completed course requirements with the minimum cgpa specified in section . . . cleared comprehensive examination . successful presentation on state of the art of the chosen field of research . successful presentation and defense of research proposal the ph. d. students are normally expected to complete successfully the qualifier requirements before the beginning of the fifth semester of his her registration in the ph. d. program and in any case not later than the beginning of the sixth semester after their registration in the ph. d. program. part time candidates will need to complete the qualifier requirement before the beginning of the seventh semester. . . comprehensive examination of ph. d. m.tech ph.d student the comprehensive examination must be designed to test the general capability of the student and the breadth of his her knowledge in the discipline and areas related to the field of research. the comprehensive examination shall be conducted by a comprehensive examination committee of the department idrp. the comprehensive examination will consist of a written test with three papers. departments will offer at least papers for conducting a comprehensive examination. each paper will have broad coverage of one essential sub area of the department. the course content of these papers will be approved by the academic committee and the senate. the syllabus of papers for the comprehensive examination will not be the same as courses offered by the department it must be designed to test the breadth of the knowledge in that area. the src will specify a set three papers as a comprehensive requirement for a particular student. these three papers may be selected from across the departments. the comprehensive examination requirements shall be intimated to the ph.d. student within two weeks of src formation. all comprehensive examinations will be scheduled on two fixed days in a year. it can coincide with the annual progress evaluation day of doctoral candidates. students may decide to appear for three papers on the same day or on different days. a student can appear in the comprehensive examination before he she has completed the course requirements and satisfied the minimum specified cgpa requirement. if the performance of the ph.d. student in a comprehensive examination paper in the first attempt is not satisfactory he she will be given one more opportunity to appear within six months of the first attempt. for clearing of the comprehensive examination a student must perform satisfactorily in all papers. comprehensive examination to be completed by the students ph.d. within semesters direct ph.d. and mtech phd dual degree within semesters . . state of art seminar sota every ph.d. student is required to give a general seminar in the department covering the state of art of the area of research. the presentation must also include patent landscaping of the area. the presentation will be evaluated by the src. a candidate must have a satisfactory grade in sota awarded by src for becoming eligible to present his research proposal. . . research proposal research proposal report presentation will be evaluated by src after successful completion of sota. the research proposal must include representative research work equivalent to research work worth credits. src will allocate a letter grade based on the performance of the candidate. . . candidacy for the ph.d. degree a student enrolled in the ph.d. program is formally admitted to the candidacy for the ph.d. degree after he she has completed the qualifier requirements for the degree. only such students who are admitted to the candidacy will be allowed to submit ph.d. thesis. . relaxation in m.tech. ph.d. dual degree program m.tech. ph.d. dual degree students who have successfully completed all qualifier requirements under exceptional conditions as approved by src after years can also convert into part time external ph.d. student and exit with m.tech degree if all conditions for part time external conversion are satisfied. the renewal of their registration for every semester however will be considered only if src finds their progress to be satisfactory and recommends the continuance of registration. . cancellation of registration the registration of a student whose progress is not found to be satisfactory by the src or who has not enrolled will be liable for cancellation. the registration of a student who has not submitted his her thesis before the end of the maximum permissible period specified in section . will be liable for cancellation. . synopsis synopsis will consist of an open seminar and a comprehensive internal closed door assessment of the research work through a pre synopsis report by src. the student can submit the synopsis only if the src is satisfied with the quality and quantity of the work for submission as a ph.d. thesis. publications arising out of the thesis are to be submitted along with the pre synopsis report. students should submit the synopsis and thesis within six months of the open seminar date. if required an extension of three months may be permitted by dean academics on the recommendation of src. if the synopsis and thesis are not submitted in the specified period the student will be asked to present the synopsis again. on satisfactory completion of the prescribed courses with minimum cgpa specified in . . the comprehensive examination the sota the research work and the synopsis the student shall submit the requisite copies of the synopsis of his her research work in the required format through the supervisor s and hod to the academic section for consideration of the src. the student should have at least one paper either published or accepted for publication in a refereed journal refereed conference src members are required to certify the quality of journals conference . . thesis submission and evaluation the supervisor s shall propose a list of examiners consisting of at least four faculty members from abroad and faculty members from india who have the expertise in the area in which the student undertook research. for selecting an examiner the following guidelines should be followed the examiners shall have at least years of post ph.d. experience no two proposed examiners shall be from the same organization and the examiners can be faculty members or scientists of standing and repute. chairman senate may ask for additional names for examiners . the chairman senate shall select minimum two examiners from the proposed list of which at least one should be an examiner from outside india. the consent of these examiners shall be taken before sending the thesis to them. in addition src and supervisor s shall be the examiners of the thesis. the viva voce will be conducted in the presence of src supervisor s and the external examiner. one of the external examiners shall attend the thesis defense. the examiners shall submit a written report on the thesis within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the thesis. if both examiners declare the thesis as acceptable for award of ph.d. degree the dean academics shall request the supervisor s to hold the thesis defense by the student. if any of the examiners reject the thesis for the award of the ph.d. degree the dean academics shall report the matter to the chairman senate for further consideration. the chairman senate will refer the thesis to a third examiner under special circumstances else the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the ph.d. program. if both examiners reject the thesis for the award of the ph.d. degree no degree shall be awarded by the institute and the registration of the student shall stand cancelled in the ph.d. program. if an examiner suggests a revision of the thesis the student shall resubmit the thesis after the revision within a prescribed time period of months in consultation with the supervisor s . when both examiners recommend the thesis as accepted for the student to defend the thesis or after the resubmission of the thesis after incorporating the suggestions corrections given by the examiners the student shall publicly present the thesis and defend the contention of the thesis. the committee consisting of chairman src supervisor s the examiner from within india and other faculty members quorum would be chairman src supervisor s and an external examiner who participated in the comprehensive examination of the student shall evaluate the thesis defense of the ph.d. student also. on their recommendation dean academics shall recommend to senate to consider the award of ph.d. degree to the student. . graduation requirements a student is deemed to have completed the requirements for graduation if she he has met the requirements laid down in clauses . to . below. . minimum residential requirement table . minimum residential requirement s.no. program qualifications at the time of joining the program minimum duration in semesters of residence . m.sc. all qualifying degrees . m.sc. m.tech. dual degree all qualifying degrees . m.tech. programs full time regular sponsored all qualifying degrees part time all qualifying degrees executive all qualifying degrees . ph. d. programs full time regular engineering discipline m.tech. m.e. or m.sc. engineering in an engineering discipline m.sc. degree in a science discipline b.tech. b.e. or b.sc. engineering in an engineering discipline science humanities or social science discipline m.sc. m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science humanities or social science discipline part time all qualifying degrees external all qualifying degrees . academic the student shall be declared to have fulfilled the academic requirements if she he has earned the minimum credits as per section . for m. sc. section . for m. tech. section . for m. sc. m.tech. dual degree section . for m.tech ph.d. dual degree and section . for ph.d. while meeting the minimum cgpa requirements as mentioned in section . . . no dues clearance degree will be awarded after obtaining no dues clearance from all concerned sections as deemed necessary by dean academics . no case of disciplinary action the student shall not be considered to have completed the academic requirements if there is any case of indiscipline pending against her him. . award of degrees . . provisional certificate a student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . can be provided with a provisional certificate by the office of dean academics on the approval of chairman senate. . . degree certificate a student who completes all the graduation requirements specified in clauses . to . is recommended by the senate to the board of governors bog for the award of the appropriate degree in the ensuing convocation. the degree can be awarded only after the bog accords its approval. . amendments notwithstanding anything contained in this document the senate of iit jodhpur reserves the right to modify amend without notice rules and regulations of the postgraduate programmes at iit jodhpur.

/content/drive/MyDrive/NLU assignment1/doc2.pdf
department of mathematics proposed curriculum m.tech. dcs cat. course number course title l t p credits cat. course number course title l t p credits i semester ii semester c mal xx foundations of data science c csl xx deep learning c csl xx machine learning e xxxxx elective c mal xx data analytics e xxxxx elective e xxxxx elective e xxxxx elective ng hsn xx technical communication s x ng hsn xx professional ethics s x total total iii semester iv semester t mat xxo thesis t mat xx thesis total total electives s.no. course number course title mal xx financial engineering mal xx computational game theory csl xx natural language understanding csl xx artificial intelligence mal xx time series analysis csl xx cryptography csl xx graph theory and applications csl xx algorithm for big data mal xx multi objective optimization csl xx digital image analysis qcl xx quantum cryptography and coding qcl xxx quantum inspired optimization s.no. category course category title total courses total credits c compulsory e electives ng non graded t thesis total note . the department should retain only the relevant courses as electives for the m.tech. program. the courses that are either irrelevant or not attracting more than students should be removed from the pg booklet.course credit requirements for phd students s.no. ph.d. in with minimum courses required . engineering discipline m.tech. m.e. or m.sc. engineering in an engineering discipline compulsory m.sc. degree in a science discipline compulsory same as m.tech. compulsory electives b.tech. b.s. b.e. or b.sc. engineering in an engineering discipline compulsory same as m.tech. compulsory electives . science humanities or social science discipline m.sc. m.a. and m.phil. degree in a science humanities or social science discipline compulsory . management design as per approved norms after years of masters degree in appropriate discipline compulsory note . departments can design various sets of compulsory courses based on their research themes. these courses can either be existing ones or new courses introduced by the department. . the four compulsory courses account for a minimum of credits as per the current regulations. . direct ph.d. students holding a b.tech. degree can choose to pursue an additional m.tech. degree by fulfilling the m.tech. thesis requirements. the m.tech. thesis work must be separate from the ph.d. thesis. the additional degree will be awarded alongside the ph.d. degree only upon the completion of the ph.d. program.content of core courses title foundations of data science number mal xx department mathematics l t p d c offered for m.tech. dcs type compulsory prerequisite objectives the instructor will . provide an understanding statistical concepts for data scientist. . train the student to do matrix computations for implementing various numerical linear algebra algorithms. . train student in the domain of linear and non linear programming. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . derive distributional results needed for the statistical hypothesis testing and perform the hypothesis testing for the parameters of the normal population. . understand the numerical linear algebraic methods and their usage for data analysis. . apply programming concepts for further applications in different areas of interest. contents statistical techniques probability models and sampling techniques lectures normal chi square and t distributions basic concepts of random sampling sampling from normal distribution properties of sample mean and sample variance. estimation lectures problem of point estimation unbiased estimation maximum likelihood estimators shortest length confidence intervals for mean and variance of normal population tests of hypotheses lectures basic concepts of statistical hypotheses testing critical regions type i and type ii errors size and power of a test tests for one sample and two sample problems from normal populations. matrix computations matrix algebra lectures matrix operations and type of matrices rank of matrix eigenvalues eigenvectors and diagonalizable matrices vector norms matrix norms. decompositions lectures spectral decomposition schur decomposition qr factorization singular value decomposition svd polar decomposition pseudo inverse. approximations lectures least square approximations low rank approximation. optimization techniques unconstrained optimization lectures convex set convex function first and second order conditions gradient descent method application in linear and nonlinear regression constrained optimization lectures karush kuhn tucker conditions lagrange multiplier method interior point method application in svm. text books . casella g. and berger r. statistical inference cengage learning. . ross s.m. stochastic processes wiley. . mayer c.d. matrix analysis and applied linear algebra siam. . kambo n. s. mathematical programming techniques second edition affiliated east west press . beck amir first order methods in optimization. society for industrial and applied mathematics . reference books . rohatgi v.k. and saleh a.k.m.e. . an introduction to probability and statistics wiley. . ross s.m. . an introduction to probability models elsevier. . m goloub g.h. and charles f.v.l. matrix computations jhu press. . lancaster p. and tismenetsky m. the theory of matrices with applications academic press. . bazaraa m. s. sherali h.d. and shetty c. m. nonlinear programming theory and algorithms third edition wiley publications online course material . agrawal p.n. numerical linear algebra nptel course material department of mathematics indian institute of technology roorkee . goswami a. chakraborty d. optimization nptel course material department of mathematics indian institute of technology kharagpur machine learning number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type compulsory prerequisite introduction to computer sc. probability statistics and stochastic processes linear algebra antirequisite iml prml objectives . to understand various key paradigms for machine learning approaches . to familiarize with the mathematical and statistical techniques used in machine learning. . to understand and differentiate among various machine learning techniques. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . to formulate a machine learning problem . select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analyzing data in a given feature space. . apply pattern recognition and machine learning techniques such as classification and feature selection to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. contents introduction lectures definitions datasets for machine learning different paradigms of machine learning data normalization hypothesis evaluation vc dimensions and distribution bias variance tradeoff regression linear bayes decision theory lectures bayes decision rule minimum error rate classification normal density and discriminant functions parameter estimation lectures maximum likelihood and bayesian parameter estimation discriminative methods lectures distance based methods linear discriminant functions decision tree random decision forest and boosting feature selection and dimensionality reduction lectures pca lda ica sffs sbfs clustering lectures k means clustering gaussian mixture modeling em algorithm kernel machines lectures kernel tricks svms primal and dual forms k svr k pca artificial neural networks lectures mlp backprop and rbf net foundations of deep learning lectures dnn cnn autoencoders text books . shalev shwartz s. ben david s. understanding machine learning from theory to algorithms cambridge university press . r. o. duda p . e. hart d. g. stork pattern classification wiley blackwell nd edition. reference books . mitchell tom . machine learning tata mcgraw hill . c. m. bishop pattern recognition and machine learning springer verlag new york st edition. online course material . department of computer science stanford university data analytics number mal xx department mathematics l t p d c offered for m.tech. dcs type compulsory prerequisite objectives the instructor will . introduce the basics of data science and its underlying concepts. . introduce data processing manipulation and cleaning techniques. . enable students to be able to analyze the data using r. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . acquire familiarity with the basic concepts of data science. . distinguish between different kinds of data and data governance. . understand the preparation and processing of the data. . comprehend what r is and how it s used to perform data analysis. contents data analysis lectures data preparation data pre processing data cleaning data integration data transformation data reduction redundancy removal data storage data handling querying data data representation and exploration big data. central tendency of data and variation in data lectures arithmetic mean median quantiles mode geometric mean and harmonic mean range interquartile range and quartile deviation absolute deviation and absolute mean deviation mean squared error variance and standard deviation coefficient of variation and boxplots. moments association of variables lectures central moments absolute moments and computation of moments skewness and kurtosis univariate and bivariate scatter plots quantile in d plots correlation coefficient rank correlation coefficient measure of association for discrete and counting variables least squares method. lab using r implementation of concepts learnt using r. text books . kotu v. and deshpande b. data science concepts and practice morgan kaufmann. . saltz j.s. and stanton j.m. an introduction to data science sage publications. . wickham h. and grolemund g. r for data science import tidy transform visualize and model data o reilly media inc. . toomey d. r for data science packt publishing ltd. reference books . kelleher j.d. and tierney b. data science mit press. . moreira j. carvalho a. and horvath t. a general introduction to data analytics john wiley sons. . mayer schonberger v. and cukier k. big data the essential guide to work life and learning in the age of insight john murray publications. . knell r.j. introductory r a beginner s guide to data visualization online course material not availabletitle deep learning number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type compulsory prerequisite machine learning antirequisite deep learning csl xx objectives . provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms related to machine learning with specific focus on deep learning. learning outcomes students are expected to have the ability to . design and program e cient algorithms related to recent machine learning techniques train models conduct experiments and develop real world dl based applications and products contents deep networks lectures cnn rnn lstm attention layers applications techniques to improve deep networks lectures dnn optimization regularization automl representation learning lectures unsupervised pre training transfer learning and domain adaptation distributed representation discovering underlying causes auto dl lectures neural architecture search network compression graph neural networks lectures probabilistic generative models lectures dbn rbm deep generative models lectures encoder decoder variational autoencoder generative adversarial network gan deep convolutional gan variants and applications of gans text books . goodfellow i. bengio. y. and courville a. deep learning the mit press reference books . charniak e. introduction to deep learning the mit press. . research literature. online course material . of elective courses title financial engineering number mal xx department mathematics l t p d c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite objectives the instructor will . securities pricing securities risk management assessment prediction and decision making under uncertainty regarding future events and their consequences . portfolio optimization balancing risk and return . modeling pricing of derivatives and itos calculus learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . valuation of financial portfolio . pricing of financial derivatives options and contracts . understanding risk and return contents lectures introduction to financial markets and financial instruments financial derivatives risk and return risky and risk free assets interest rates bonds bonds pricing spot and forward rates investment portfolio mean variance analysis capital asset pricing model arbitrage pricing theory. lectures discrete time models stock and money market models principle of no arbitrage pricing of contracts forward and future options put call parity option pricing martingales binomial model crr model black scholes formula greeks random walk brownian motion stochastic process itos integral and ito deoblins formula. textbook . m. capinski and t. zastawniak . mathematics for finance an introduction to financial engineering springer. . s.n. neftci . principles of financial engineering. academic press elsevier. reference books . j.c. hull . options futures and other derivatives. pearson india. . s.e. shreve . stochastic calculus for finance i the binomial asset pricing model springer online course material not availabletitle computational game theory number mal xx department mathematics l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite basics of optimization theory objectives . provide background in the area of computational game theory. . provide sufficient knowledge of the subject which can be used by students for further applications in their respective domains of interest. learning outcomes . understanding of fundamentals like nash equilibrium dominant strategies and their applications. . basic understanding of the co operative games iterated games and mixed strategies. . knowledge of non co operative games zermelo s algorithm and their applications. contents lectures von neumann and morgenstern utility functions expected utility and expected utility maximization paradoxes of expected utility maximization compact representations for preference relations dichotomous preferences and goals. representations for specifying goals strategic form non cooperative games basic model and solution concepts pure strategy nash equilibrium dominant strategies notable games coordination games and focal points complexity of pure strategy nash equilibrium. lectures mixed strategies nash s theorem and nash equilibrium computing mixed strategy nash equilibria lemke howson algorithm zero sum games minimax theorem compact representations for strategic form games boolean games congestion games iterated games finitely repeated games and backward induction infinitely repeated games measuring utility over infinite plays modelling strategies as finite state machines with output moore machines the folk theorems iterated boolean games axelrod s tournament the hawk dove game evolutionary game theory evolutionarily stable strategies. lectures extensive form non cooperative games zermelo s algorithm and backward induction subgame perfect equilibrium zermelo s theorem compact representations for extensive form games peek games and exptime completeness results the game description language gdl imperfect information games peek games with incomplete information cooperative games transferable utility tu characteristic function games basic model stability fairness solution concepts cost of stability shapley value banzhaf index induced subgraph representation marginal contribution nets simple tu games swap and trade robustness weighted voting games vector weighted voting games network flow games ntu games and their representations textbooks . g. chalkiadakis e. elkind and m wooldridge computational aspects of cooperative game theory morgan claypool . . machler e. solan s. zamir game theory cambridge u.p. . . m. j. osborne an introduction to game theory oxford u.p. . reference books . r. d. luce and h. raiffa games and decisions wiley . m. j. osborne and a. rubinstein a course in game theory . online course material not availabletitle natural language understanding number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite deep learning antirequisite none objectives the instructor will . to provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms related to natural language understanding . impart working expertise by introducing practical problems. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . formulate natural language understanding tasks . design and implement basic applications of nlu contents traditional nlu lectures introduction to nlu motivation morphology parts of speech language models word sense disambiguation anaphora resolution basics of supervised and semi supervised learning for nlu hidden markov models for language modeling em algorithm structured prediction dependency parsing topic models semantic parsing sentiment analysis. deep learning for nlu lectures intro to neural nlu word vector representations neural networks and backpropagation for named entity recognition practical tips gradient checks overfitting regularization activation functions recurrent neural networks for language modeling and other tasks grus and lstms for machine translation recursive neural networks for parsing convolutional neural networks for sentence classification question answering and dialogue system graph neural network for nlu natural language generation analysis and interpretability of neural nlu. knowledge graphs lectures knowledge graph embedding techniques inference on knowledge graphs. text books . c. manning h. sch tze foundations of statistical natural language processing mit press. . d. jurafsky j.h. martin speech and language processing an introduction to natural language processing computational linguistics and speech recognition rd edition draft . reference books . e. bender linguistic fundamentals for nlp morgan claypool publishers.. . j. allen natural language understanding pearson education . . research literature. online course material . deep learning for nlp title artificial intelligence number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type compulsory ai prerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite artificial intelligence csl xx objectives the instructor will . cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of ai. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . develop an understanding of where and how ai can be used. contents introduction lectures uninformed search strategies greedy best first search and or search uniform cost search a search memory bounded heuristic search local and evolutionary searches constraint satisfaction problems lectures backtracking search for csps local search for csps adversarial search lectures optimal decision in games the minimax algorithm alpha beta pruning expectimax search knowledge and reasoning lectures propositional logic reasoning patterns in propositional logic first order logic syntax semantics inference in first order logic unification and lifting backward chaining resolution planning lectures situation calculus deductive planning stripes sub goal partial order planner bayesian network causality and uncertain reasoning lectures probabilistic models directed and undirected models inferencing causality introduction to probabilistic reasoning reinforcement learning lectures mdp policy q value passive rl active rl policy search text books . russel s. and norvig p . artificial intelligence a modern approach rd edition prentice hall reference books . research literature online course material . department of computer science university of california berkeley . nptel artificial intelligence time series analysis number mal xxx department mathematics l t p offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite probability statistics and random processes objectives . to provide working knowledge of time series techniques and forecasting methods . to provide with techniques and receipts for estimation and assessment of quality of econometric models with time series data learning outcomes . to develop the skills needed to do empirical research in elds operating with time series data sets contents models for time series lectures time series data trend seasonality cycles and residuals strong and weak stationarity autocorrelation function linear processes estimation of mean and covariance functions wold decomposition theorem. models of stationary process lectures arma p q processes acf and pacf modeling using arma processes estimation of parameters testing model adequacy order estimation. univariate forecasting models lectures prediction in stationery processes special reference to arma processes frequency domain analysis spectral density and its estimation transfer functions. multivariate forecasting models lectures single equation models vector ar and arma models econometric models non stationary models lectures stationarity through differencing arima model armax arimax models and introduction to arch models. indicative assignments analysis of real data namely neon data imd data etc. using different time series models text books . blockwell p. j. and davis r. a. . introduction to time series and forecasting nd edition springer. . chat eld c. the analysis of time series an introduction chapman and hall crc th ed. reference books . box g.e.p. jenkins g. and reinsel g. time series analysis forecasting and control rd ed. pearson education online course material . mikusheva anna time series analysis department of economics massachusetts institute oftechnology mit opencourseware course material cryptography number csl department computer science l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite none objectives . introduce students to the domain of symmetric and asymmetric cryptography and develop an appreciation for some applications in which cryptography is used in real life. learning outcomes . learn to model security of various cryptographic primitives as an adversarial game. . learn the design principles of block ciphers stream ciphers hash functions mac s public key encryption and digital signatures. . identify novel and significant open research questions in the field. . using cryptographic primitives to design some real life protocols such as zkp coin tossing over insecure channel and mpc. contents foundations lectures attacking toy ciphers kerchofs law perfect security owe prg prf prp symmetric key cryptography lectures block ciphers stream ciphers hash functions mac authenticated encryption. asymmetric key cryptography lectures dkhe rsa el gamal cryptosystems with required mathematical foundations elliptic curve cryptography digital signatures public key infrastructure and digital certificates. cryptographic protocols lectures secure multiparty computation zero knowledge proofs oblivious transfer etc. text books . katz lindell theory of modern cryptography crc press rd edition. . hoffstein pfipher silverman introduction to mathematical cryptography reference books na online course material graph theory and applications number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite none antirequisite none objectives the instructor will . introduce various terminologies concepts and algorithms related to graphs and discuss their applications in real world scenarios. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . formulate and solve real world problems using the mathematical foundations of graph theory. contents preliminaries lectures graphs isomorphism subgraphs matrix representations degree operations on graphs degree sequences connected graphs and shortest paths lectures walks trails paths connected graphs distance cut vertices cut edges blocks connectivity weighted graphs shortest path algorithms trees lectures characterizations number of trees minimum spanning trees special classes of graphs lectures bipartite graphs line graphs chordal graphs eulerian graphs lectures characterization fleury s algorithm chinese postman problem hamilton graphs lectures necessary conditions and su cient conditions independent sets coverings matchings lectures basic equations matchings in bipartite graphs perfect matchings greedy and approximation algorithms vertex colorings lectures chromatic number and cliques greedy coloring algorithm coloring of chordal graphs brook s theorem edge colorings lectures gupta vizing theorem class graphs and class graphs equitable edge coloring planar graphs lectures basic concepts euler s formula polyhedrons and planar graphs characterizations planarity testing color theorem directed graphs lectures out degree in degree connectivity orientation eulerian directed graphs hamilton directed graphs applications lectures biology social sciences engineering computer science text books . west d.b. introduction to graph theory nd edition prentice hall of india . deo n. graph theory with application to engineering and computer science prentice hall of india reference books . research literature online course material nptel graph theory for cse nptel graph theory for mathematics algorithm for big data number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite none antirequisite none objectives the instructor will . introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data. . emphasize both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms. learning outcomes students are expected to have the ability to . design and analyzing existing algorithms as well as design novel algorithms pertaining to big data. contents introduction lectures randomized algorithms universal hash family probabilistic algorithm analysis approximation algorithms approximation schemes sublinear time complexity sublinear algorithms. property testing lectures testing list s sortedness or monotonicity distribution testing testing properties of bounded degree graphs dense graphs and general graphs. sketching and streaming lectures extremely small space data structures countmin sketch count sketch linear sketching ams sketch turnstile streaming graph sketching graph connectivity mapreduce lectures mapreduce algorithms in constrains settings such as small memory few machines few rounds and small total work e cient parallel algorithms external memory and cache obliviousness lectures minimizing i o for large datasets algorithms and data structures such as b trees buffer trees multiway merge sort text books na reference books n na online course material na self learning material . department of computer science harvard university algorithms for big data . . introduction to property testing link by oded goldreich . multi objective optimization number mal xxx department mathematics l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite objectives . introduce multi objective optimization. . introduce evolutionary computations and using these to solve nonlinear optimization problems. . application of multi objective optimization. learning outcomes . understand the ideas of evolutionary computations and multi objective optimization. . understand the advantages of multi objective optimization. . solving single and multi objective optimization problems using evolutionary computations. . implementation of multi objectvie optimization in some engineering problems. contents evolutionary optimization lectures introduction to evolutionary optimization genetic algorithms mathematical models of genetic algorithms. evolutionary programming and evolution strategies antcolony optimization and particle swarm optimization multi objective optimization lectures partial ordering with respect to a pointed cone non dominated sorting introduction to multi objective optimization applications of multi objective optimization solution of a multi objective optimization problem efficient week efficient proper efficient solution ideal and nadir vector. multi objective decision making classical methods for solving multi objective optimization lectures weighted sum method constrained method goal programming technique weighted metric methods lexicographic ordering method. advantages and limitations of classical methods multi objective optimization using evolutionary algorithm lectures evolutionary algorithms for multi obicative optimization binary and real coded genetic algorithm nsga ii nsga iii particle swarm optimization for multi objective optimization implementation of evolutionary algorithms application of multi objective optimization in polynomial time problems lectures shortest path problems spanning trees assignment problems application of multi objective optimization in np hard problems lectures knapsack problems branch and bound problems and travelling salesman problems application of multi objective optimization in engineering text books . dan simon evolutionary optimization algorithms wiley . k. deb multiobjective optimization using evolutionary algorithms wiley . m. ehrgott multicriteria optimization springer reference books . r fletcher practical methods of optimization nd edition wiley . k. miettinen nonlinear multiobjective optimization kluer academic publications . online course material . d. sharma evolutionary computation for single and multiobjective optimization department of mechanical engineering iit guwahati nptel course materials courses . k. deb introduction to optimization and its scope in practice gian mhrd iit kharagpur video lectures digital image analysis number csl xx department computer science and engineering ee l t p c offered for m.tech. dcs type elective prerequisite linear algebra antirequisite none objectives the instructor will . to introduce the origin and formation of digital imaging. . to develop the understanding of different types of imaging techniques for different purposes. . to equip the students with various possible applications of image analysis. learning outcomes students are expected to have the ability to . enhance image in spatial and frequency domain. . implement various aspects of image segmentation and compression. contents digital image fundamentals lectures image modeling sampling and quantization imaging geometry digital geometry image acquisition systems different types of digital images image transforms lectures basic transforms spatial and frequency domain transforms image enhancement lectures point processing interpolation enhancement in spatial domain enhancement in frequency domain color image processings lectures color representation laws of color matching chromaticity diagram color enhancement color image segmentation color edge detection image compression lectures lossy and lossless compression schemes prediction based compression schemes vector quantization sub band encoding schemes jpeg compression standard morphology lectures dilation erosion opening closing hit and miss transform thinning extension to grayscale morphology euler technique segmentation lectures segmentation of grey level images watershed algorithm for segmenting grey level image feature detection lectures fourier descriptors shape features object matching features text books . c. gonzalez r.e. woods digital image processing prentice hall th edition. . a.k. jain fundamentals of digital image processing prentice hall. reference books na online course material . quantum cryptography and coding number qcl xx department idrp qic l t p c offered for m.tech dcs type elective prerequisite objectives the instructor will . introduce the students to the fascinating field of cryptography and coding with specific emphasis on the quantum aspects of it. . highlight a number of facets of these theories having some parallel with the more familiar classical world. learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to . understand the fundamental principles of quantum cryptography and coding. . become familiar with the modern aspects of the theory including its experimental implementation. contents cryptography lectures various aspects of modern cryptography number theoretic concepts classical coding theory lectures concepts of entropy mutual information and related aspects shannon s coding theorem. basic concepts of quantum mechanics lectures from the perspective of information and cryptography hilbert space states operators hermitian and unitary simple measurements. some basic no go theorems lectures with implications to cryptography. some basic applications pertinent to quantum cryptography lectures entanglement teleportation dense coding quantum key distribution protocols bb b ekert protocol goldenberg vaidman counterfactual quantum cryptography protocols of quantum dialogue quantum secret sharing protocol quantum cheating and cryptography protecting information and qka quantum key agreement shor s factoring algorithm and modern cryptography experimental progress in quantum cryptography. quantum coding lectures quantum aspects of shannon coding theorem. lectures text books . nielsen michael a. and chuang isaac i. quantum computation and quantum information cambridge university press . reference books . benenti g. casati g. and strini g. principles of quantum computation and information world scientific press . bouwmeester d. ekert a. and zeilinger a. the physics of quantum information nd edition springer online course material . shor p. quantum computation mit open course . j fall link quantum inspired optimization number mal xxx department mathematics l t p c offered for msc m.tech and ph. d. students type elective prerequisite any nonlinear optimization course and basic concepts of quantum introduction. objectives . introduce quantum computing in optimization. . formulation and solution of different optimization problems in quantum way. . learning outcomes . learn to solve different optimization problems using quantum annealers and digital quantum computer . learn about more general optimization problems and about the variational quantum eigen solver contents introduction of optimization lecture general optimization problem local global solution integer programming binary knapsack programming and applications quadratic unconstrained binary optimization problems lectures max cut problem and ising model formulating the problem in quantum way moving from ising to qubo and back combinatorial optimization problems with qubo model application in knapsack problems graph colouring etc. adiabatic quantum computing and quantum annealing lectures adiabatic quantum computing quantum annealing constrained quadratic models in ocean running constrained problem on quantum annealing quantum approximate optimization algorithm lectures from adiabatic to qaoa using qaoa with qiskit using qaoa with pennylane grover adaptive search lectures grover s algorithm quantum oracles for combinatorial optimization using gas with qiskit quantum computing for pseudo boolean optimization lectures basic transformations hadamard transform x transform k local hamiltonian problems graph structures and optimization problems variational quantum eigensolver lectures hamiltonians observables and their expectation values introduction of variational quantum eigensolver using vqe with qiskit using vqe and pennylane text books . elias f. combarro samuel gonzalez castillo a practical guide to quantum machine learning and quantum optimization pact publishing ltd. birmingham . . w. cruz santos g. morales luna approximability of optimization problems through adiabatic quantum computation morgan claypool publishers california usa reference books na online course material . advances for quantum inspired optimization by informs

/content/drive/MyDrive/NLU assignment1/doc3.pdf
courses offered bydepartment of computer science and engineeringcourse list course name page no. level courses compulsory courses cse and ai ds data structures and algorithms design and analysis of algorithms human machine interaction maths for computing pattern recognition and machine learning principles of computer systems i principles of computer systems ii principles of programming languages software engineering level courses compulsory courses cse and ai ds arti cial intelligence computer architecture computer networks database systems data engineering maths for big data operating systems level courses compulsory courses cse and ai ds data visualization deep learning dependable ai optimization in ml theory of computation level courses elective courses cse and ai ds advanced data structures computational cognition behavior modeling distributed systems ict for development introduction to computer graphics social networks software maintenance visual computing lab level courses preliminary courses cse and ai ds bridge course on dsa data structures and practices level courses core courses cse and ai ds advanced data structures algorithms algorithms for big data arti cial intelligence computer architecture deep learning dependable ai dl ops machine learning ml ops software and data engineering level courses elective courses cse and ai ds advanced arti cial intelligence advanced biometrics advanced computer graphics advanced machine learning ad hoc wireless networks approximation algorithms arti cial intelligence in transportation autonomous systems bio image computing blockchain compiler design complexity theory computational microeconomics computational optimization computational social choice theory computer graphics computer network protocols and applications computer vision crowd sourcing and human computing cryptography cybersecurity data visualization digital image analysis distributed algorithms distributed database systems edge and fog computing embedded systems environmental informatics ethics policy law and regulations in ai fundamentals of machine learning gpu programming graph theoretic algorithms graph theory and applications hardware software co design health informatics high level synthesis information retrieval introduction to ar and vr introduction to blockchain introduction to wireless ad hoc networks machine learning in epidemiology machine learning with big data medical image analysis mobile and pervasive computing g mobile networks natural language understanding neuromorphic computing and design parameterized complexity principles of biological vision and applications randomized algorithms resource constrained ai security and its applications social computing social network analysis soft computing techniques software de ned networks software testing and quality assurance speech understanding sustainable computing stream analytics vehicular ad hoc networks vanets video processing virtualization and cloud computing level courses selected special topics cse and ai ds selected topics in arti cial intelligence i selected topics in arti cial intelligence ii selected topics in arti cial intelligence iii selected topics in computer science i selected topics in computer science ii selected topics in computer science iii special topics in algorithms level courses compulsory courses cse and ai ds course title data structures and algorithms course no. csxxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech of all branches type compulsoryprerequisite introduction to computerprogramming antirequisite none objectives . to introduce and practice the implementation of various data structures used for indexing searching and sorting operations. . to introduce basic mathematical techniques for algorithm analysis and design. learning outcomes . ability to design and implement appropriate data structures for indexing searching and sortingoperations for real world problems. . designing of new algorithms using standard data structures. . analyzing the time and space complexities of standard data structures and basic algorithms. contentsalgorithm analysis and complexity big little oh omega theta notation recurrence equations. lectures abstract data types linear data structures tree binary trees tree traversal applications. lectures search trees binary search trees balanced searchtrees avl trees b trees. lectures heaps binary heap heap order property and min maxheaps. lectures sets disjoint set adt basic operations on sets union find algorithm. lectures sorting algorithms bubble sort selection sort bucketsort insertion sort overview of divide and conquer quick sort merge sort. lectures hashing hash tables and operations hash function open and closed hashing external and internalhashing collision resolving methods rehashing. lectures graph algorithms de nitions branch and bound backtracking representation traversal shortest path algorithms minimum spanning tree algorithm topological sorting. lectures greedy techniques and dynamic programming lectures laboratory . implementation of data structures using c programming language. . practically verifying and comparing run time performance and asymptotic behavior of various datastructures and related algorithms. . applications of data structures from real life scenarios. text bookm. a. weiss data structures and algorithm analysis in c addison wesley nd edition. reference bookt. h. cormen c. e. leiserson r.l. rivest c. stein introduction to algorithms mit press rd edition. level compulsory course course title design and analysis of algorithms course no. cslxxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectives .to introduce and implement various techniques for designing algorithms and advanced datastructures. .to learn space and time complexity analysis of algorithms. learning outcomes .ability to choose and implement appropriate algorithm design techniques for solving problems. .understand how the choice of data structures and algorithm design methods impact theperformance of programs. .ability to analyze the worst case and average case behaviour of algorithms in terms of time andmemory requirements. contentsreasoning about algorithms p np np completeness reductions complexity analysis. lectures graph algorithms strongly connected components kosaraju salgorithm and applications. lectures greedy techniques local versus global optimality interval scheduling exchangearguments. lectures divide and conquer optimality recursive algorithms divide and conquer recurrences the mastertheorem and applications non uniform recurrences. lectures dynamic programming reusing sub computations sequencealignment bellman ford algorithm precomputing floyd warshall algorithm johnson s algorithm combinatorial problems. knapsack lectures linear programming canonical and standard forms feasibility and optimization simplex algorithm. lectures approximation algorithms relative approximations pas and fpas scheduling. lectures randomized algorithms random guess quick select random guess with high con dence karger smin cut algorithm storing associative data hashing error bounds. lectures text bookt. h. cormen c. e. leiserson r.l. rivest c. stein introduction to algorithms mit press rdedition. reference bookj. kleinberg e. tardos algorithm design pearson education st edition. level compulsory course course title human machine interaction course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesto provide a theoretical and practical understanding of human machine interaction hmi design including concepts of user centered and design thinking usability interfaces rapid prototyping andevaluation. learning outcomes .the students will have .a broad understanding of human machine interaction and latest technologies. .understanding of the perceptual and cognitive basis of human machine interaction. .knowledge of user centered design and techniques for rapid prototyping. .knowledge of assessing usefulness and usability of a design .introduction to approaches for gathering and analyzing interaction data and conveying designconcepts. lectures discussions in the lab and web based ip pedagogy .theories and research methods in hmi .understanding user experience .foundations and concepts of interaction .prototyping techniques .prototyping evaluation .communicating user needs and requirements .speculative design .case studies laboratory and assignments primary approach . find a poorly designed item anything .submit either a picture or sketch and describe why it is poorly designed. week . heuristic evaluation and interview week . user scenarios personas and storyboards week . user journeys week . wireframes paper and digital prototyping week . prototype evaluation study design week . value sensitive design evaluation week . design visual interfaces laptop mobile e.g. gesture based week . design voice interfaces e.g. speech chatbot week . design multimodal interactions week text bookh. sharp j. preece y. rogers interaction design beyond human computer interaction wiley th edition. level compulsory course course title maths for computing course no. cslxxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds type coreprerequisite none antirequisite none objectives .to learn about languages grammars and computation models .to learn about computability .to learn basics of parsing techniques learning outcomes the students are expected to have the ability to .model computer science problems using discrete mathematical structures .distinguish between computable and non computable problems .develop understanding of properties of languages and design parsers contentsdiscretestructures cancomputerssolveeveryproblem thelimitsofcomputing settheory relationsand functions propositional logic first order logic counting techniques. lectures proof techniques constructive contraposition contradiction mathematical induction lectures graph theory properties of graphs graph matchingand coloring. lectures automata theory dfas nfas equivalence of dfas andnfas closure properties of regular languages regular expressions equivalence of regular expressions and nfas nonregular languages context freegrammars context free languages. lectures turing machine introduction designing turing machines the universal turing machine. lectures parsing techniques lr lalr shift reduce parsers. lectures text booksm. sipser introduction to the theory of computation cengage learning rd edition.k.h. rosen discrete mathematics and its applications mcgraw hill th edition. referencesj.e. hopcroft r. motwani j.d. ullman pearson introduction to automata theory languages and computation rd edition.r. johnsonbaugh discrete mathematics prentice hall th edition. self learning materialstanfordcs level compulsory course course title pattern recognition and machine learning course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds ee type compulsoryprerequisite introduction to computer science probability statistics and stochastic processes antirequisite introduction tomachine learning objectives . to understand various key paradigms for pattern classi cation and machine learning approaches . to familiarize with the mathematical and statistical techniques used in pattern recognition andmachine learning. . to understand and differentiate among various pattern recognition and machine learningtechniques. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . to formulate a machine learning problem . select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analyzing data in a given feature space. . apply pattern recognition and machine learning techniques such as classi cation and featureselection to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. contentsintroduction de nitions datasets for pattern recognition different paradigms of pattern recognitionandmachine learning data normalization hypothesis evaluation vc dimensions and distribution bias variance tradeoff regression linear lectures discriminative methods distance based methods lineardiscriminant functions decision tree randomdecision forest and boosting lectures bayes decision theory bayes decision rule minimumerror rate classi cation normal density anddiscriminant functions bayesian networks lectures parameter estimation maximum likelihood and bayesianparameter estimation lectures feature selection and dimensionality reduction pca lda ica sffs sbfs lectures arti cial neural networks mlp backprop and rbf net lectures kernel machines kernel tricks support vector machines primal and dual forms k svr k pca lectures clustering k means clustering gaussian mixture modeling em algorithm lectures laboratoryprogramming labs on normalization visualization evaluation regressions decision tree bayes parameter estimation pca lda ann svm k means gmm feature selection text book . r. o. duda p. e. hart d. g. stork pattern classi cation wiley blackwell nd edition. reference books . c. m. bishop pattern recognition and machine learning springer verlag new york st edition. . t. m. mitchell machine learning mcgraw hill education st edition. self learning material . introduction to machine learning nptel course material department computer scienceand engineering iit madras http nptel.ac.in courses . machine learning stanford university level compulsory course title principles of computer systems i course no. aidslxxxdepartment cse ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech ai type compulsoryprerequisite maths for computing antirequisite computer architecture objectivesthe instructor will . explain necessary layered abstraction of a system . provide an understanding of basic concepts of several hardware components and design ofcomputing components . introduce language translation schemes learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . design combinational and sequential circuits for a set of problems . explain the working principles of several components of a computer . design algorithms for language translations. contentsintroduction layered architecture of a system hardware software hardware software interaction lectures digital circuit design combinational circuits combinational analysis and design sequential circuits sequential analysis and design lectures computer system design instruction set architecture cpu performance analysis pipelining memoryhierarchy i o ilp lectures language translation levels of language translation compiler semantic analysis code generation lectures laboratorydigital logic circuits digital hardware vhdl state machines machine language design memory cpu assembler parallel programming. text books . s. warford computer systems jones and bartlett learning th edition. . r. bryant d. o hallaron computer systems a programmer s perspective pearson rd edition. reference books . saltzer j. and kaashoek f. control systems principles design rd edition morgankaufmann . john l. hennesy david a. patterson computer architecture a quantitative approach th edition morgan kaufmann. online materialnptel course foundations of computer systems design level compulsory course title principles of computer systems ii course no. aidslxxxdepartment cse ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite principles of computer systems i samesemester antirequisite operating systems computer networks objectivesthe instructor will . explain necessary layered abstraction of a system . provide an understanding of the fundamentals of operating systems and networking . introduce the concepts of virtualization learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . explain the working principles of operating systems . design interconnected environments using basic networking protocols. . apply concepts of virtualization in a practical environment contentsintroduction layered architecture of a system kernel network operating system interaction lectures processmanagement process processstates concurrent processes inter processcommunication synchronization deadlock lectures storage management memory allocation virtual memory file management lectures network design working principles layered architecture ip addressing protocols for transport andapplication layers. lectures virtualization basics of virtual machines containers virtualization techniques cloud and datacenters lectures laboratoryintroduction to the linux environment process management and synchronization scheduling memorymanagement client server messagepassing internetprotocols ipaddressing peertopeerprotocol virtualization. text books . s. warford computer systems jones and bartlettlearning th edition. . n.f. schneidewind computer network software and hardware engineering withapplications wiley ieee press. reference books .a. silberschatz p.b. galvin g. gagne operating system concepts wiley th edition. . s. das unix concepts and applications tata mcgraw hill. . j. kurose k.ross computer networking a top down approach pearson th edition. online material . nptel course operating system fundamentals nptel course computer network and internetprotocol level compulsory course course title principles of programming languages course no. csxxxdepartment computer science engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type compulsoryprerequisites data structures and algorithms computerarchitecture operating systems antirequisite none objectives .to introduce major programming paradigms and principles and techniques involved in design andimplementation of modern programming languages. .to introduce frameworks for reasoning about programming languages. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to .identify the abstract syntax of any programming language .analyze and critique appreciate the inherent philosophy of different programming languages .design small domain speci c languages language features and implement them as interpreters orembeddings in another language. contentsintroduction study of principles of programming paradigmslike imperative functional object orientedand logic programming. lectures syntax and semantics of programming languages syntaxand semi formal semantic speci cation usingattribute grammar. lectures imperative programming location reference and expressions assignment and control data types blocks procedures modules. lectures object oriented programming classes objects abstraction encapsulation inheritance and softwarereuse. lectures functional programming function as rst class objects higher order functions polymorphic data types type checking type inferencing recursion lambda calculus. lectures logic programming horn clauses uni cation sldresolution backtracking cuts. lectures concurrent programming processes synchronizationprimitives safety and liveness properties multithreaded programs. lectures case studies c java haskell prolog python. lectures text booksr. sethi programming languages concepts and principles pearson nd edition.t. w. pratt m.v. selkowitz programming languages design and implementation pearson th edition. reference booksb.j. maclennan principles of programming languages design evaluation andimplementation oxford university press rd edition.m. ben ari principles of concurrent and distributed programming pearson nd edition.j.c. mitchell foundations for programming languages mit press.b.c. pierce types and programming languages mit press st edition.h.p. barendregt the lambda calculus its syntax and semantics north holland nd edition.d.p. friedman m. wand essentials of programming languages mit press rd edition. level compulsory course course title software engineering course no. csl xxdepartment computer science engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse type compulsoryprerequisite introduction to computer science antirequisite none objectives .this course focuses on engineering practices and processes that development team uses to makesure the team is setup for change .the course introduces practices techniques and processes that can help team build high qualitysoftware learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to comfortably and effectively participateinvarioustechniquesandprocessesfor buildingscalableandhigh quality software. contentsintroduction of software engineering need for software engineering software quality attributes softwareproduct pipelines software life cycle models and processes requirement engineering using umldiagrams. lectures software architecture and design design principles design patterns architecture versus design modularity software components and connectors architecture styles. lectures essence of modern software engineering software engineeringessence essencelanguage essencekernel using essence kernel in agile development practices agile principles agile process modelsthrough essence kernel large scale complex development using kernel. lectures software testing quality metrics coding style and static analysis tools veri cation and validation varioustesting techniques and test case generations. lectures software project management software versioning and continuous integration project managementand risk analysis con guration management cost analysis and estimation. lectures laboratoryassignment project on software requirement acquisition uml diagrams preparing softwarerequirement speci cation practicing agile methods user story backlog test case generation unittesting ci con gurations cost estimation manpower management and sprint analysis using burndown charts. text booksr.s. pressman b.r. maxim software engineering a practitioner s approach mcgraw hill india th edition.mark richards neal ford fundamentals of software architecture o reilly media inc.l. bass p. clements r. kazman software architecture in practice pearson rd edition.i. jacobson h. lawson p.w. ng p.e. mcmahon m. goedicke the essentials of modernsoftware engineering acm books. level courses compulsory courses cse and ai ds course title arti cial intelligence course no. csl xxdepartment cse ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite arti cial intelligence csl xx objectivesto provide the foundations for ai problem solving techniques and knowledge representationformalisms. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . identify and formulate appropriate ai methods for solving a problem. . implement ai algorithms . compare different ai algorithms in terms of design issues computational complexity andassumptions contentsintroduction uninformed search strategies greedybest rst search and or search uniform costsearch a search memory bounded heuristic search lectures local search techniques beam search hill climbingsearch genetic search techniques lectures constraint satisfaction problems backtracking searchfor csps local search for csps lectures adversarial search optimal decision in games theminimax algorithm alpha beta pruning expectimaxsearch lectures knowledgeandreasoning propositional logic reasoningpatternsinpropositional logic firstorderlogic syntax semantics inference in first order logic uni cation and lifting backward chaining resolution lectures representation information extraction representationtechniques foundations of ontology lectures planning situation calculus deductive planning stripes sub goal partial order planner lectures bayesian network and causality probabilistic models directed and undirected models inferencing reasoning causality lectures reinforcement learning mdp policy q value lectures text books. russel p. norvig arti cial intelligence a modern approach pearson th edition. reference books . e. rich k. knight s. b. nair arti cial intelligence mcgraw hill education rd edition. . j. pearl causality models reasoning and inference cambridge university press nd edition. . d. koller n. friedman probabilistic graphical models principles and techniques mitpress level compulsory course course title computer architecture course no. csl xx eelxxxdepartment cse and ee structure l t p c offered for b. tech. cse type compulsoryprerequisite none antirequisite objectives .to understand aspects of computer architecture and program performance .to provide essential understanding of different subsystems of modern computer system and designaspects these subsystems .to introduce hands on experience of computer architecture design and performance enhancement learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to .identify basic components and design of a computer including cpu memories and input outputunits .identify issues involved in the instruction execution and various stages of instruction life stage .identify issues related to performance improvement contentsintroduction basic computer organization components of computer systems informationrepresentation. lectures central processing unit arithmetic and logic unit instruction sets risc cisc and asic asipparadigms various addressing modes assembly language programming instruction interpretation micro operations and their rtl speci cation cpu design hardwired and microprogrammed performance issues parallel processing pipelining hazards advanced parallelization techniques.cache coherence protocols multicore architecture lectures memory hierarchy memory organization various levels of memory architecture and their workingprinciples cachememory writingstrategy coherence performanceissuesandenhancementtechniquesfor memory design. lectures interfacing i o transfer techniques program controlled interrupt controlled and dma introduction tocomputer buses peripherals and current trends in architecture. lectures text booksd.a. patterson j.l. hennessy computer organization and design morgan kaufmann th edition.w. stallings computer organization and architecture designing for performance pearsoneducation india th edition. referencesa.s. tanenbaum structured computer organization prentice hall of india th edition.v.c. hamacher z.g. vranesic s.g. zaky computer organization mcgraw hill th edition.j.l. hennessy d.a. patterson computer architecture a quantitative approach morgankaufmann th edition.d.v. hall s.s.s.p. rao microprocessors and interfacing mcgraw hall rd edition. level compulsory course course title computer networks course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c . offered for b.tech type compulsoryprerequisite prob. stat. and stochastic process antirequisite none objectives .to understand the organization of computer networks factors in uencing the performance ofcomputer networks and the reasons for having a variety of different types of networks. .to understand the internet structure various protocols of the internet and how these protocolsaddress the standard problems of networking and the internet. .hands on experience on networking fundamentals through practical sessions. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to .explain essential protocols of computer networks in terms of design implementation operations. .identify various design parameters such as latency bandwidth error rate throughput and theirin uence on node link utilization and performance contentsintroduction layer approach packet switching techniques performance metrics delay loss throughput bandwidth delay product latency basic understanding of physical and data link layer. lectures network layer internetworking tunneling encapsulation fragmentation internet protocol and itsoperation routing algorithms distance vector and link state algorithm and routing protocols. lectures transport layer transmission control protocol flowcontrol error control congestion control header services connection management timers congestion control user datagram protocol introduce lowlatencyprotocols webrtc lhls applications iot and fog real time applications ad hoc wirelessprotocols . lectures applications network programming socket abstraction peer to peer architecture p p architecture clientserver architecture dns http ftp smtp telnet etc. lectures advanced internetworking multicast routing queuingdisciplines and buffer management techniques. lectures network security public key and private key cryptography digital signature firewalls. lectures laboratorynetworking hardware understanding cables switches routers settingupswitchingnetwork settingup subnets and routing across the subnets socket programming development of client serverapplicationsusingsockets possibleexamples letransfer peer peer applications chat network monitor etc. networkingcommands ifcon g route arp arping ping netstat.tcpdump host nslookup dig ftp scp ssh nger dhclient dhcrelay etc.protocol analyzer closelylookingatprotocols http tcp udp icmp . dhcp dnsetc. headersand analyzing the interactions between client and server of different applicationsqualnet simulator packet tracer implementationof arqs stop and wait slidingwindowgobacknetc. verifying operations of routing protocols in uence of congestion on end users performance congestion control algorithms reno new reno cubic router buffer size on end users performance. text bookk.w. ross j.f. kurose computer networks a top down approach pearson th edition. reference booksw. stallings data and computer communications pearson th edition.l.l. peterson b.s. davie computer networks a systems approach morgan kaufmann thedition. level compulsory course course title database systems course no. csl xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type compulsoryprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectives .to understand concepts of database design database management systems and their applications data modeling and query languages. .to understand different le structures transaction management schemes concurrency controlprocesses database recovery mechanisms query processing and optimization. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to .apply different data modeling methods to requirement analysis design and implementation ofdatabase systems. .deduce normalized forms for e cient relational database design. .use appropriate storage and access structures. .use techniques for transaction management concurrency control and recovery. .analyze complexity issues of query execution. contentspreliminaries database system concepts and architecture. lectures semantic data model entity relationship er model enhanced entity relationship eer model. lectures relational model and languages relational data model relational database constraints relationaldatabasedesign by er and eer to relational mapping relational algebra and relational calculus. lectures sql schema de nition constraints queries views. lectures database design theory functional dependencies normalization. lectures algorithms for query processing and query optimization lectures database file organization disk storage file structures hashing techniques indexing structures. lectures database transaction processing transaction conceptsand theory concurrency control protocols databaserecovery protocols. lectures advanced databases distributed databases object orienteddatabases multimedia databases handling unstructured data big data nosql databases. lectures laboratoryexercises in sql covering data de nition data manipulation data retrieval transaction controlexercises in pl sql covering procedures functions loops triggersnosql data organization and query optimization. text bookr. elmasri s.b. navathe fundamentals of database systems pearson education th edition. reference books . r. ramakrishnan j. gehrke database management systems mcgraw hill rd edition. . h.g. molina j. ullman j. widom database systems the complete book pearson nd edition. . p. raj a. raman d. nagaraj s. duggirala high performance big dataanalytics computing systems and approaches springer st edition. . n. sabharwal s. gupta edward big data nosql architecting mongodb createspace independent publishing platform st edition. . k. banker p. bakkum s. verch d. garrett t. hawkins mongodb in action manningpublications nd edition. . g. harrison next generation databases nosql and big data apress st edition. level compulsory course title data engineering course no. cslxxxdepartment computer science and engineering maths structure l t p c offered for b.tech ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite principles of computer system ii operatingsystems antirequisite databasesystems objectivesthe instructor will . introduce fundamental concepts in representing data accessing it and analysing it . explore applications in data science and big data projects learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . develop suitable data science ecosystem for the given application . understand various data storage and retrieval techniques . understand sql and nosql databases and their usage . analyse data using python and python based tools contentsintroduction data source big data structured andunstructured data lectures data models and storage relational databases nosqldatabase normalized and denormalizeddata models data cleaning distributed data storage and management hashing indexing lectures query processing querying big data using sql andnosql elastic search query optimization speeding up maintaining acid property design patterns data reliability quality and provenance distributed query processing query optimization and processing lectures data warehousing olap oltp lectures streaming data analytics in memory analytics datapipelines and dashboards predictive analytics lectures laboratorylab exercises should be in accordance with the theory lectures. the lab sessions may cover thefollowing topics . data collection techniques . indexing implementation for the structured data and unstructured data . sql queries schema ddl dml dql . data format interchange using xml json . nosql system hbase hive mongodb . data wrangling data operations e.g. numpy . hadoop spark and mapreduce textbooks . m. kleppmann designing data intensive applications the big ideas behind reliable scalable and maintainable systems o reilly. . l. weise advanced data management for sql nosql cloud and distributeddatabases walter de gruyter gmbh. . a. silberschatz h.f. korth s. sudarshan database system concepts mcgraw hillpublications th edition. reference books . h.g. molina j. ullman j. widom database systems the complete book pearson nd edition. . p. raj a. raman d. nagaraj s. duggirala high performance big data analytics computing systems and approaches springer st edition. level compulsory course self learning material . nptel course on indexing and searching techniquesin databases by dr arnab bhattacharya iit kanpur nptel course on noc fundamentals of database systems by dr arnab bhattacharya iitkanpur level compulsory course course title maths for big data course no. mal xxxdepartment mathematics structure l t p c offered for b.tech ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite mathematics ii probability statistics andstochastic processes antirequisite none objectivesto introduce basic conceptsandcoretechniqueswhichenablethestudentstohandlelargedataandequipstudentswithsu cient knowledgeof coretechniqueswhichcanbeusedbythestudentsintheirrespective elds of interest. learning outcomesstudents will have the ability to . understand novel techniques to handle a large amount of data. . develop concepts and tools to ingest process and analyse massive data in real time. contentsstatistical methods multivariate analysis samplingtheory simple random sampling strati edsampling cluster sampling ratio and regression estimators two stage sampling compressive sensing. lectures numerical linear algebra spectral decomposition schur decomposition qr factorization singularvalue decomposition svd pca for large matrices algorithms for big matrices least squareapproximations low rank approximation manifolds. lectures text books . d. miner a. shook mapreduce design patterns building effective algorithmsand analytics for hadoop and other systems o reilly media. . v. mayer sch nberger k. cukier big data a revolution that will transform how welive work and think houghton mi in harcourt. . n. marz j. warren big data principles and best practices of scalable real timedata systems manning. reference books . m. mittal v.e. balas d.j. hemanth r. kumar data intensive computing applicationsfor big data ios press. . b. furht a. escalante eds. handbook of data intensive computing springer st edition. . g. strang linear algebra and its applications cengage learning th edition. level compulsory course course title operating systems course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type compulsoryprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectives . to learn about design principles of operating systems . to learn various functionalities and services of an operating system in general . to do a case study of operating system learning outcomes . ability to understand the system performance that is driven by the operating system services . ability to modify and compile os . ability to diagnose and solve various problems in operating systems contentsoverview of operating systems types of operatingsystems system calls and os structure. lectures processes management process threads cpu scheduling. lectures process coordination mutual exclusion mutex implementation semaphores monitors and conditionvariables deadlocks. lectures memory management swapping paging segmentation virtual memory demand paging pagereplacement algorithms. lectures storage management i o devices and drivers disksand le systems file layout and directories filesystem performance file system reliability. lectures protection and security system protection systemsecurity. lectures laboratorydesigning a shell in linuxmultithreaded programming usingpthread solving the sleeping barberproblem modi cation of schedulingalgorithm in linuxsolving the producer consumer problem over anetwork finding text data and stack segments of aprocess in linux implementation of pagereplacement algorithmschanging le attributes in linuximplementing an encrypted le system in linuximplementing symbolic links in linux text booka. silberschatz p.b. galvin g. gagne operating system concepts john wiley sons inc. th edition. reference booka.s. tanenbaum a.s. woodhull operating systems design and implementation pearson rd edition.w. stallings operating systems internals and design principles pearson th edition. level courses compulsory courses cse and ai ds course title data visualization course no. csl xxdepartment maths cse structure l t p c . offered for b.tech ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite data engineering database systems antirequisite data visualization csl xx objectivesthe instructor will . explain techniques and algorithms for creating effective visualizations based on principles fromgraphic design. . introduce several industry standard software tools to create a compelling and interactive visualizationof various types of data. learning outcomes . an understanding of the key techniques and theory used in visualization including data models graphical perception and techniques for visual encoding and interaction. . exposure to a number of common data domains and corresponding analysis tasks includingmultivariate data networks text and cartography. . practical experience building and evaluating visualization systems. contentsintroduction data for graphics design principles value for visualization categorical time series andstatistical data graphics introduction to visualization tools lectures graphics pipeline introduction primitives vertices edges triangles model transforms translations rotations scaling view transform perspective transform window transform lectures .aesthetics and perception graphical perception theory experimentation and the application graphicalintegrity layering and separation color and information using space effectively lectures visualization design visual display of quantitativeinformation data ink maximization graphicaldesign exploratory data analysis heat map lectures multidimensional data query analysis and visualizationof multi dimensional relational databases interactive exploration tsne lectures interaction interactive dynamics for visual analysis visual queries finding patterns in time seriesdata trend visualization animation dashboard visual storytelling lectures collaboration graph visualization and navigation online social networks social data analysis collaborative visual analytics text map geospatial data lectures laboratoryvisualization design exploratory data analysis interactive visualization tools like tableau gephi d etc. mini project. text books . e. tufte the visual display of quantitative information graphics press nd edition. . j. koponen j. hild n data visualization handbook crc press. reference books . m. lima the book of trees visualizing branches of knowledge princeton architectural press. . r. tamassia handbook of graph drawing and visualization crc press. . s. murray interactive data visualization for the web o reilly press nd edition. level compulsory coursecourse title deep learning course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering ai ds structure l t p c . offered for b.tech. type compulsoryprerequisite introduction to machine learning patternrecognition and machine learning antirequisite deep learning csl xx objectivesthe objective of this course is .to introduce students through some of the latest techniques in deep learning. .hands on and the students should be able to design intelligent deep learning systems for solving theproblems in the area of their interests. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to .understand various deep learning models such cnn autoencoders rnn etc. .analyze various applications solved through the use of deep learning models .design and implement their own deep learning models for the problem of their choice contentsneural networks dl optimizers sgd mbgd adagrad adam and regularization initializationmethods lectures dl models autoencoder convolutional neural networks recurrent neural networks lstm networkarchitecture search nas lectures deep generative models deep belief networks variational autoencoders generative adversarialnetworks deep convolutional gan lectures representation learning unsupervised pre training transfer learning and domain adaptation distributed representation discovering underlying causes lectures laboratoryautoencoder cnn lstm dbm gans variants transfer learning nlm graph nn adversarial losses text booki. goodfellow y. bengio a. courville deep learning the mit press st edition. reference books . a. zhang z. lipton m. li a. smola dive into deep learning release . . d. foster generative deep learning o reilly media st edition. self learning material . practical machine learning with tensor ow nptel course material department computerscience and engineering iit madras stanford cs class cs n convolutional neural networksfor visualrecognition level compulsory course course title dependable ai course no. csl xxdepartment cse ai de structure l t p c offered for b.tech ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite introduction to machinelearning pattern recognition andmachine learning ai preferred knowledge antirequisite preferred deep learning same semester antirequisite dependable ai objectivesthe instructor will provide characteristic details of ai and machine learning systems to make them dependable such asexplainability interpretability safety etc. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . assess the dependability of ai systems. . develop explainable robust and safe ai models. contentsintroduction overview motivation challenges medical and surveillance lectures explainable ai accuracy explainabilitytradeoff interpretabilityproblem predictability transparency traceability causality reasoning attention and saliency lectures interpretable ai prediction consistency applicationlevel evaluation human level evaluation functionlevel evaluation lectures adversarial robustness adversarial attacks and defenses lectures trustworthy ai integrity reproducibility accountability lectures bias free ai accessibility fair data agnosticsdesign disentanglement lectures privacy preserving ai federated learning differential privacy and encrypted computation lectures veri ed ai environment and speci cation modeling design with formal inductive synthesis evaluationplatforms for ai safety lectures textbooks . j. pearl the book of why the new science of cause and effect basic books. . n. bostrom the ethics of arti cial intelligence. the cambridge handbook of arti cialintelligence cambridge university press. self learning materialudacity course on secure and private ai level compulsory course course title optimization in ml course no. csl xxdepartment mathematics structure l t p c . offered for b.tech ai ds type compulsoryprerequisite prml or introduction to ml antirequisite optimization objectives . to understand the theory of optimization methods and algorithms developed for solving varioustypes of optimization problems . to apply the mathematical results and numerical techniques of optimization theory to machinelearning problems learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . compose existing theoretical analysis with new aspects and algorithm variants. . formulate the most important optimization algorithms for machine learning applications contentsintroduction to optimization machine learning and optimization linear and non linear optimization discrete optimization network ows convex sets functions. lectures regularizations andsgd l andl regularization first order methods gradient descent accelerationand subgradient method stochastic gradient methods sgd heuristics and tricks escaping saddlepoints. lectures other topicsrelevant tooptimizationfor ml interior point andcutting planemethodsforml min maxproblems convex concave and nonconvex non euclidean and submodular optimization. lectures reference books . s. boyd l. vandenberghe convex optimization cambridge university press. . s. sra s. nowozin s. wright eds. optimization for machine learning mit press . . e. hazan lecture notes optimization for machinelearning d. bertsekas nonlinear programming athena scienti c rd edition. self learning material . level compulsory course title theory of computation course no. csl xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse type electiveprerequisite maths for computing antirequisite objectivesto learn about computability techniquesto learn about advanced computational complexity models learning outcomes . to be able to distinguish between computable and uncomputable problems . gaining in depth understanding of advanced complexity models contentscomputability review of turing machine np and np completeness diagonalization view of pdas dfas fas as restricted tms and related theorems. tape reduction and robustness of the model.encoding and enumeration of turing machines undecidability. rice myhill shapiro theorem.relativisation.decision trees and communication complexity certi cate complexity randomized decision trees lower bounds on randomized complexity sometechniques for decision tree lower bounds comparison trees and sorting lower bounds yao sminmax lemma de nition of communication complexity lower bound methods overview of othercommunication models applications of communication complexity.time complexity time as a resource linear speeduptheorem crossing sequences and theirapplications hierarchy theorems. p vs np. time complexity classes and their relationships. notionof completeness reductions. cook levin theorem. ladner s theorem. relativization barrier baker gill solovay theorem.spacecomplexity spaceasaresource. pspace landnl.reachabilityproblem completenessresults. savitch s theorem inductive counting to show the immerman szelepcsenyi theorem.reachability problems expander graphs sl lcomplexity of counting randomization counting problems theory of p completeness. the complexity classes pp parityp bpp rp bpp areinp poly toda stheorem. textbooksd. kozen automata and computability springerd. kozen theory of computation springers. arora and b. barak complexity theory a modern approach cambridge university press. reference bookssipser m. introduction to the theory of computation cengage learninghopcroft j. e. motwani r. and ullman j. d. introduction to automata theory languages andcomputation pearson level courses elective courses cse and ai ds course title advanced data structures course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds type electiveprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesdatastructuresareoneof theimportant elementsof moderncomputer science. theobjectiveof thecourseistolearnmajor resultsandcurrentresearchdirectionsindatastructurebeyondthetraditionallinear and non linear data structures. learning outcomesstudents will have the ability to . use unconventional and modern data structures for thechangingneedof newagealgorithmicproblems. . solve problems using data structures. contentstemporal data structures persistent and retroactivedata structures pointer machine. lectures geometric data structures point location range searching fractional cascading data structures formoving data. lectures dynamic optimality analytic bounds splay trees geometric view independent rectangle key independent optimality. lectures external memory data structures cache oblivious co data structures such as b tree co priorityqueue etc. lectures integer data structures predecessor successor problems van emde boas x fast and y fast trees fusion trees sketching parallel comparison most signi cant set bit. lectures static trees and string data structures least commonancestor range minimum queries levelancestor su x tree su x array linear time construction for large alphabets su x tray documentretrieval. lectures memory e cient data structures rank select tries compact su x arrays and trees. lectures dynamic graphs link cut trees heavy light decomposition euler tour trees decremental connectivity intrees fully dynamic connectivity. lectures reference booksr.e. tarjan data structures and network algorithms siam. covers bsts splay trees link cuttrees p. morin open data structures athabasca universitypress st edition. covers bsts b trees hashing and some integer data structures self learning materialmitlectures in advanced data structures . level elective course title computational cognition behavior modeling number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all type electiveprerequisite probability statistics prml antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . draw on formal models from classic and contemporary arti cial intelligence to explorefundamental issues in human cognition and behavior. . encouragestudentstoexploreanswerstoquestionsoncognitionandbehavior e.g. whatarethedifferent formsthatourknowledgeoftheworldtakes howdoesthisleadtobehaviour andwaysto model them . help students develop an understanding of howcomputational modeling can advancecognitivescience howcognitivesciencecancontributetoresearchinmachinelearningandai andhowto t and evaluate cognitive models to understand behavioral data. learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . demonstrate knowledge of basic concepts and methodologies of cognitive and behavioralmodelling be able to design simple models for sample problems. . demonstrate understanding of the relationship between computational models andpsychological theories critically assess the psychological adequacy of a given model. . qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate computational models of cognition and behavior. . extend the understanding of these models to the design of architectures for social cognitiveagents for applications such as autonomous driving and assistive robotics. contentsfractal computational modelling techniques for cognition and behavior introduction lecture themotivationunderlyingthecomputational modellingof cognition andthepossible questions that can be answeredprobabilisticapproachestomodellingcognition behavior lectures bayesianinference hierarchicalbayesian models probabilistic graphical modelsinductive logic programming language of thought models. lectures deep learning reinforcement learning for modellingcognition. lectures information sampling active learning. lectures fractal cognition modelling themindasaninformation processingsystem marr slevelsofanalysis computational algorithmic implementation lecture structure and formation of intuitive theories of cognition of physical biological andsocial systems learning causal relations. lectures symbolic rule based subsymbolic probabilistic connectionist network based models ofcognition lectures methodology and issues in the development and evaluation of cognitive models lectures whichpsychological data are relevant howdo we collect suchdata e.g. eeg eye tracker acrossages genders what predictions can bemadebythemodelsof cognition howcanthesepredictionsbetested some possible example models language processing memory reasoning categorization. fractal behavioral modelling introduction lectures brain behavior understanding social behavior general motivationunderlying computational modelling of behaviorsymbolic rule based subsymbolic probabilistic connectionist network based approaches tobehavior modelling lectures methodology and issues in the development and evaluation of behavioral models lectures whichbehavioral dataarerelevant howdowecollectsuchdata e.g. eeg eye tracker acrossages genders societies what predictions can be made howdo these predictions apply to assistive systemdesign level elective course text books . russell norving . arti cial intelligence a modern approach. th edition. prentice hall. . farrell lewandowsky . computational modelingof cognitionandbehaviour. cambridgeuniversity press. reference material . issa and isaias . sustainable design hci usability and environmental concerns.springer verlag. . mcclelland rogers .theparallel distributedprocessingapproachtosemanticcognition.nature reviews neuroscience. . . peterson abbott gri ths . adapting deep network features to capture psychologicalrepresentations. th annual conference of the cognitive science society. . tenenbaum kemp gri ths goodman . rational useof cognitiveresources levelsofanalysis between the computational and the algorithmic. topics in cognitive sciences. . . wilson collins . ten simple rules for the computational modellingof behavioral data.elife. e . . goodman tenenbaum gerstenberg . conceptsinaprobabilisticlanguageof thought.center for brains minds and machines cbmm . level elective course course title distributed systems course no. cs xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type electiveprerequisite operating systems antirequisite none objectivesto introduce issues challenges and approaches related to distributed systems learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability in . designing deploying and managing distributed systems . understanding and analyzing various distributed algorithms and approaches contentsintroduction introduction to advanced operating systemsand distributed systems. lectures concurrency ordering races implementing remoteprocedure calls time clocks and the ordering ofeventsin a distributed system distributed snapshots determining global states of distributed systems detecting concurrency bugs eraser tsvd. lectures file systems and disks a fast le system for unix scale and performance in a distributed le system thedesign and implementation of a log structured le system a case for redundant arrays of inexpensivedisks raid . lectures fault tolerance implementing fault tolerant servicesusing the state machine approach paxos practicalbyzantine fault tolerance. lectures os kernels and virtual machines microkernels systemcode veri cation kernels for multicore disaggregation virtual machines. lectures text bookst. anderson m.dahlin operating systems principles and practice recursive books nd edition.n. lynch distributed algorithms elsevier india. reference booksw.r. stevens s.a.rago advanced programming in the unix environment addison wesley rdedition.w.r. stevens b. fenner a.m. rudoff unix network programming networking apis sockets and xti volume addison wesley rd edition. online references level elective course title ict for development number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . facilitate an interactive platform for students to discuss and learn ict strategies forvarious problems. . re ect upon his her own experiences in deploying ict solutions in social settings and theassociated challenges. learning outcomesstudents will have the ability to . appreciate the potential that ict possesses to make an impact on the society. . learn through various case studies that different problem settings require differentsolution approaches. contentsfrom the origins of ictd to big data and development lectures development theory and the critiques of ictd lectures localization techniques and identity management lectures ictd knowledge economies and development lectures e learning and development lectures e governance and development lectures icts and environment sustainability lectures building sustainable rural information service networks lectures sustainability failures of rural telecentres lecture ict for agriculture lecture ictd information sharing practices lecture ictd for community networks and disaster management lectures ict d the future lecture text books . heeks r. .information and communication technologyfor development ict d . routledge. references . level elective course course title introduction to computer graphics course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electiveprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite computer graphics csl xx objectivesto provide a thorough introduction to computer graphics techniques focusing on d and dmodeling image synthesis and rendering learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . create and explain graphics primitives and interactive graphics applications in c . synthesize and render d and d worlds for visualization and animation contentsintroduction to computer graphics graphics systems overview of computer graphics representingpictures preparing presenting interacting with pictures for presentations opengl primitives lectures scan conversions points lines line drawing algorithms circle generation algorithm ellipsegenerating algorithm scan line polygon ll algorithm clipping algorithms line and polygon anti aliasing lectures transformations and viewing basic transformations translation rotation scaling matrixrepresentations and homogeneous coordinates transformations between coordinate systems re ectionshear viewingpipeline windowtoviewportcoordinatetransformation clippingoperations viewport clipping d viewing lectures curves and surfaces conics parametric and non parametricforms curves and splines surfaces andnurbs d modelling lectures hidden surfaces depth comparison z buffer algorithm back face detection bsp tree method theprinter s algorithm scan line algorithm hidden line elimination wire frame methods lectures color and shading models phong s shading model gouraudshading shadows and background colormodels photo realistic rendering radiosity lectures animation functions pipeline sample programs fordrawing d d objects event handling and viewmanipulation lectures text book . d. hearn p. baker computer graphics pearson education india nd edition. reference books . j. f. hughes a. van dam m. mcguire d.f. sklar j. d. foley s. k. feiner k. akeley computer graphics principles and practices addison wesley rd edition. . d. f. rogers j. a. adams mathematical elements for computer graphics mcgrawhill nd edition. . z. xiang r. plastock schaum s outline of computer graphics mcgraw hilleducation nd edition. . j. kessenich g. sellers d. shreiner opengl programming guide pearsoneducation th edition. self learning materialnptel computer science and engineering computer graphics level elective course title social networks course no. csl xx department computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b. tech type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite social network analysis objectivesprovide introduction to social network analysis its mathematical foundation and application. learning outcomesthe students are expected to . gain the ability to understand the applications related to social networks . write programs with social network datasets and formulate real world problems with anyrelational data set resembling social networks contentsintroduction graphs social networks network types network data sets gephi for networkanalysis lectures network properties network measures strong and weakties homophily structural balance components lectures network models random networks scale free networks the barab si albert model erdos renyimodel lectures structural analysis of networks using python pythonfor network analysis empirical studies structuralproperties generate synthetic networks working with signed networks lectures social network applications information cascades small world phenomenon epidemics communitydetection link prediction page rank lectures evolving network and temporal networks network evolution working with temporal network data lectures multiplex and multi layer network lecture network analysis in other fields network analysisin biology sports transports lectures textbooks . d. easley j. kleinberg networks crowds and markets reasoning about ahighly connected world cambridge university press. a. barabasi network science cambridge universitypress. m. newman networks oxford university press nd edition. reference books . c. gros complex and adaptive dynamical systems springer springer th edition. . e. estrada the structure of complex networks theory and applications oxforduniversity press. . w. de nooy a. mrvar v. batagelj exploratory social network analysis withpajek cambridge university press rd edition. self learning material . level elective course course title software maintenance course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type electiveprerequisite software engineering antirequisite none objectives .to explain theories models tools and processes for the maintenance and evolution of largesoftware systems and cloud applications .to familiarize with practices techniques and processes that can help team build high qualitysoftware learning outcomes .understand the di culties of developing code in a change context as opposed to new development .identify the principal issues associated with software evolution and explain their impact on thesoftware lifecycle .describe techniques coding idioms and other mechanisms for implementing designs that are moremaintainable contentsintroduction basic concepts difference between newdevelopment and maintenance categorizingsoftware change and limitations maintenance frameworks lectures understanding software evolution program comprehension models top down bottom up opportunistic variants of software maintenance relations to software engineering life cycle techniques of software evolution and testing quantitative analyses empirical analyses qualitativeanalyses of software evolution dynamics lectures software maintenance maintenance processes quick x model boehm s model osborne s model iterative enhancement model process maturity search based software testing summarizationtechniques for code changes and testing change impact analysis lectures software reuse reverse engineering levels techniques forward restructuring refactoring reengineering software reuse and evolution the laws of software evolution reuse techniques anddesign for reuse libraries vs. application frameworks software product lines lectures laboratoryassignments projects on program comprehension and reverse engineering program slicer staticanalyser dynamic analyzer data owanalyser cross reference dependency analyser transformationtools testing tools simulators test case generator test path generators source code control system. text books .grubb p. takang a. a. . software maintenance concepts and practice. world scienti c. .galin d. . software quality concepts and practice. john wiley sons.. reference bookpigoski t. m. . practical software maintenance best practices for managing yoursoftware investment. wiley publishing. online coursesreverse engineering essentials udemy level elective course title visual computing lab number cse ee xxdepartment l t p c offered for btech. type specialization coreprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will introduce students to the importance of human centered visual computing. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to design applications that explicitly consider humanperception. contentssensing devices concept of dynamic range hdr displays event based camera time of flight camera coded apertures lidar d reconstruction kinect scanner laser scanner weeks mini project in recognition weeks mini project in navigation weeks mini project in action weeks mini project in mixed reality weeks mini project in trustable decision weeks textbooksszeliski r. .computer vision algorithms andapplications. springer verlag new york inc.available online.reinhard e. heidrich w. debevec p. pattanaik s. ward g. myszkowski k. .high dynamicrange imaging acquisition display and image based lighting. nd edition. morgan kaufmann. self learning materialprof.ioannis yannis gkioulekas computational photography carnegiemellon university silvio savarese computer vision from d reconstruction to recognition stanforduniversity preparatory course material prof. gilbert strang linear algebra and learning from data massachusetts institute oftechnology level courses preliminary courses cse and ai ds title bridge course on dsa number cs xxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. and ph. d. type coreprerequisite antirequisite objectives . to revise the topics covered in undergrad data structure and algorithm courses. . to implement introductory data structures and algorithms in c c python. learning outcomes . learn basic data structure and algorithmic techniques . implementation of various data structure and algorithms to solve real life problems contentsdata structures days stack queue linked lists heaps min and max binary search tree. introductiontoalgorithms days asymptoticnotations recurrencerelations sorting quick radix selection and heap sort searching. graphalgorithms days dfsindirectedandundirectedgraphs bfsandconnectedcomponents connectivity in directed graphs dijkstra s algorithm topological sorting greedy and divide conquer algorithms days prim s kruskal s interval scheduling mergesort masters theorem. misc. days binary trees avl trees dynamic programming matrix multiplication. textbooks . jon kleinberg eva tardos algorithm design pearson education st edition. . thomas h. cormen charles e. leiserson ronald l. rivest clifford stein introduction toalgorithms. self learning material . level preliminary course title data structures and practices number csp xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. st year type compulsoryprerequisite computer programming antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . explain various data structures and provide details to implement and use themin differentalgorithms learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . write debug and rectify the programs using different data structures . expertise in transforming coding skills into algorithm design and implementation contentslaboratory experimentsexercises based onabstract data types arrays link list list hashtables dictionaries structures stack queues labs data structures heap sets sparse matrix binarysearch tree b tree b tree graph labs algorithm implementation quick or merge sort breadth or depth rst search or dijkstra s shortestpath first algorithm dynamic programing labs textbook . weiss m. a. data structures and algorithm analysis in c addison wesley. . lipschutz s. data structures with c mcgraw hill education. . cormen t. h. leiserson c. e. rivest r. l. andstein c. introductiontoalgorithms mit press online course material . department of computer science and engineering iit delhi level courses core courses cse and ai ds title advanced data structures algorithms number cs xxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. cse and m.tech. ai ph.d. type coreprerequisite algorithm design and analysis data structures maths for computing antirequisite none objectives . theobjectiveofthecourseistointroduceseveral advancedalgorithmictechniquesanddatastructures. . implementation of various advanced data structure and algorithms to solve real life problems learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . learn advanced data structure techniques . learn a new set of techniques to cope with np hard problems. . identify novel and signi cant open research questions in the eld. . implementation of various advanced data structure and algorithms to solve real life problems . understand the intractability of problems. contentsdata structures and algorithms techniques fractals i and ii advanced data structures lectures red blacktrees interval trees dynamicorder statistics binomial heap fibonacci heap lectures tries splaytrees b trees hashing disjointset union nd lectures .network flows lectures maximumflowproblem ford fulkersonalgorithm max owmincuttheorem augmenting paths applications to bipartite matching problem and disjoint paths indirected and undirected graphs.amortized analysis lectures aggregate analysis accounting method potential method.dynamic programming lectures knapsack independent set of trees interval scheduling setcover permutation problems partition problems string matching naive method knuth morris pratt algorithm.np completeness and reductions lectures complexity classes p np co np np complete np hard example reductions between problems. fractal iii advanced algorithmic techniquesadvanced algorithmic techniques lectures approximation algorithms greedy algorithm load balancing set cover lectures thepricingmethod vertexcover knapsack lectures randomized algorithms lectures . textbooks . jon kleinberg eva tardos algorithm design pearson education st edition. . thomas h. cormen charles e. leiserson ronald l. rivest clifford stein introduction toalgorithms. self learning material . level core course title algorithms for big data number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. phd type compulsoryprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce some algorithmic techniques developed for handling large amounts of data. . emphasize both theoretical as well as practical aspects of such algorithms. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . designandanalyzingexistingalgorithmsaswell asdesignnovel algorithmspertainingtobigdata. contents introduction randomized algorithms universal hash family probabilistic algorithm analysis approximationalgorithms approximationschemes sublinear timecomplexity sublinear algorithms. lectures property testing testing list s sortedness or monotonicity distribution testing lectures testing properties of bounded degree graphs dense graphs and general graphs. lectures sketching and streaming extremely small space datastructures countminsketch count sketch lectures linear sketching ams sketch turnstile streaming graph sketching graph connectivity lectures mapreduce mapreducealgorithmsinconstrainssettingssuchassmall memory fewmachines fewrounds and small total work e cient parallel algorithms lectures external memory and cache obliviousness minimizing i o for large datasets algorithms and datastructures such as b trees buffer trees multiway merge sort lectures self learning material . department of computer science harvard university algorithms for big data . introduction to property testing link by odedgoldreich . level core course title arti cial intelligence number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. ph.d. type compulsory ai prerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite arti cial intelligence csl xx objectivesthe instructor will . cover various paradigms that come under the broad umbrella of ai. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . develop an understanding of where and how ai can be used. contentsintroduction uninformed search strategies greedy best rst search and or search uniform costsearch a search memory bounded heuristic search local and evolutionary searches lectures constraint satisfaction problems backtracking searchfor csps local search for csps lectures adversarial search optimal decision in games the minimax algorithm alpha beta pruning expectimax search lectures knowledge and reasoning propositional logic reasoning patterns inpropositional logic first orderlogic syntax semantics inference in first order logic uni cation and lifting backward chaining resolution lectures planning situation calculus deductive planning stripes sub goal partial order planner lectures bayesian network causality and uncertain reasoning probabilisticmodels directedandundirectedmodels inferencing causality introduction to probabilisticreasoning lectures reinforcement learning mdp policy q value passiverl active rl policy search lectures textbook . russel s. andnorvig p. arti cial intelligence amodernapproach rdedition prenticehall reference books . research literature self learning material . department of computer science university of california berkeley nptel arti cial intelligence level core course title computer architecture number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech phd type compulsoryprerequisite none antirequisite computer architecture objectivesthe instructor will . provide background to understand various components of a modern computer system its interconnections and performance issue learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . explain the working principles of various components of modern computer systems . compare between systems using benchmark data . write execute and debug parallel programs on gpu contentscsl xx multi system architecture introduction de ning computer architecture flynn s classi cation of computers metrics forperformance measurement. lectures memory hierarchy introduction advancedoptimizationsof cacheperformance memorytechnologyand optimizations virtual memory and virtual machines the design of memory hierarchies introduction to pin instrumentation and cache grind case study intel core i lectures csl xx multicore processing instruction level parallelism instruction level parallelism concepts and challenges basic compilertechniques for exposing ilp reducing branch costs with advanced branch prediction dynamicscheduling superscalar limitations of ilp case study dynamic scheduling in intel core i . lectures multicore processor introduction cpu interconnections network on chip noc routingprotocols quality of service on noc. lectures csl xx fundamentals of parallel programming data level parallelism introduction vector architecture simd instruction set extensions formultimedia graphicsprocessingunits gpumemoryhierarchy detectingandenhancingloop levelparallelism cuda programming case study nvidia maxwell. lectures textbook .hennessy j.l.andpatterson d.a. computerarchitecture aquantitativeapproach th edition morgan kaufmann publishers . shen j.p. and lipasti m.h. modern processor design fundamentals of superscalarprocessors mcgraw hill publishers self learning material . cuda preparatory course material . department of computer science and engineering indian institute of technology madras level core course title deep learning number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. st year ph.d. st year type compulsory ai prerequisite machine learning antirequisite deep learning csl xx objectives . provide technical details about various recent algorithms and software platforms relatedtomachine learning with speci c focus on deep learning. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . design and programe cient algorithmsrelatedtorecent machinelearningtechniques trainmodels conduct experiments and develop real world dl based applications and products contentsfractal foundations of deep learningdeep networks cnn rnn lstm attention layers applications lectures techniques to improve deep networks dnn optimization regularization automl lectures fractal representation learningrepresentation learning unsupervised pre training transfer learning and domain adaptation distributed representation discovering underlying causes lectures auto dl neural architecture search network compression graph neural networks lectures fractal generative modelsprobabilistic generative models dbn rbm lectures deep generative models encoder decoder variational autoencoder generativeadversarial network gan deep convolutional gan variants and applications of gans lectures text book . goodfellow i. bengio. y. and courville a. deep learning the mit press . reference book . charniak e. introduction to deep learning the mit press. . research literature. self learning material . level core course title dependable ai number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite machine learning arti cial intelligence antirequisite dependable ai csl xx objectivesthe instructor will . providecharacteristicdetailsof ai andmachinelearningsystemstomakethemdependable such as explainability interpretability safety etc. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . assess the dependability of ai systems. . develop explainable robust and safe ai models. contents introduction overview motivation challenges medical and surveillance lectures explainable ai accuracy explainabilitytradeoff interpretability problem predictability transparency traceability causality reasoning attention and saliency lectures interpretable ai prediction consistency application level evaluation human level evaluation function level evaluation lectures adversarial robustness adversarial attacks and defences lectures trustworthy ai integrity reproducibility accountability lectures bias free ai accessibility fair data agnostics design disentanglement lectures privacypreservingai federatedlearning differential privacyandencryptedcomputation lectures veri ed ai environment and speci cation modeling design with formal inductive synthesis evaluation platforms for ai safety lectures textbook . pearl j. the book of why the new scienceof cause and effect basic books. reference book . bostrom n. the ethics of arti cial intelligence. thecambridgehandbookof arti cialintelligence cambridge university press. preparatory course material . proceedings of ijcai workshop on explainable arti cial intelligence xai . level core course title dl ops number cs xxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech. cse and ai m.tech. cse and ai ph.d. type coreprerequisite machine learning or prml or iml antirequisite none objectives to cover various techniques of deep learning system design. to cover topics around building a dl system that is deployable reliable and scalable learning outcomesstudents will gain the ability to . develop an understanding to analyze tradeoffs for designing production systems withdl components analyzingvariousqualitiesbeyondaccuracysuchasoperationcost latency and updateability . understandingoflatesttrendsinsystemsdesignstobettersupportthenextgenerationofdlapplications and applications of dl to optimize the architecture and the performance ofsystems. . develop an understanding to design production quality fault tolerance scalable dl system contents deep learning frameworks hardware requirements containers versioning provenance and reproducibility dl compilers labs largedatarequirement storage lineage distributedandscalabledeeplearning dynamicnetworks parallel optimization mixed precision training labs deployment monitoring updating and maintenance labs hyperparameter tuning faster serving dlsystemsinproductionandclientlevel inference e.g nvidia triton labs advanced topics labs textbooks none online materials and sysml level papers self learning material level core course title machine learning number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. cse ai dcs phd type compulsoryprerequisite introduction to computer sc. probability statisticsand stochastic processes linear algebra antirequisite iml prml objectives . to understand various key paradigms for machine learning approaches . to familiarize with the mathematical and statistical techniques used in machine learning. . to understand and differentiate among various machine learning techniques. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . to formulate a machine learning problem . select an appropriate pattern analysis tool for analyzing data in a given feature space. . applypatternrecognitionandmachinelearningtechniquessuchasclassi cationandfeatureselection to practical applications and detect patterns in the data. contentsfractal i supervised learningintroduction de nitions datasets for machine learning different paradigms of machine learning data normalization hypothesis evaluation vc dimensions and distribution bias variance tradeoff regression linear lectures bayes decision theory bayes decision rule minimumerror rate classi cation normal density anddiscriminant functions lectures parameter estimation maximum likelihood and bayesian parameter estimation lectures fractal ii unsupervised learningdiscriminative methods distance based methods linear discriminant functions decision tree random decision forest and boosting lectures feature selection and dimensionality reduction pca lda ica sffs sbfs lectures clustering k means clustering gaussian mixture modeling em algorithm lectures fractal iii kernels and neural networkskernel machines kernel tricks svms primal and dual forms k svr k pca lectures arti cial neural networks mlp backprop and rbf net lectures foundations of deep learning dnn cnn autoencoders lectures text book . shalev shwartz s. ben david s. understanding machine learning from theory toalgorithms cambridge university press . r. o. duda p. e. hart d. g. stork pattern classi cation wiley blackwell nd edition. reference book . mitchell tom . machine learning tata mcgraw hill . c. m. bishop pattern recognition andmachinelearning springer verlagnewyork st edition. self learning material . department of computer science stanford university level core course title ml ops number csp xxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. ph.d. type coreprerequisite machine learning or prml or iml antirequisite none objectives to cover topics of ml system design including applications and products with machinelearning algorithms. learning outcomesstudents will gain the ability to . learning to design ml systems to solve practical problems. . learning how an ml system works in production and insights about challenges . identifying systems faults and applying strategies to identify root causes in ml systems. . picking the right framework and compute infrastructure and trade off space. . troubleshooting training and ensuring the reproducibility of results. contents machine learning systems concepts and stages data collection to model development challenges and solutions devops tomlops frameworkand software stack labs ml data structure and data processing labs machinelearningaccelerators mlcompilers virtual environments git docker containers kubernetes lab experiment tracking reproducibility and reusability labs quantized and low precision machine learning labs deployment platforms and infrastructure labs machine learning systemversioning tracking testingand debugging labs textbooks online materials and sysml level papers self learning material level core course title software and data engineering number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for m.tech. phd type compulsoryprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . discuss techniques to manage a large amount of data . provide mechanisms to design and develop data intensive computing systems learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . design complex end to end data pipeline for data processing . critically identify and use the tools for data handling and management . use modern software technologies to design and develop data analytical systems contentscsl xx cloud computing and virtualization basicsof complexsoftwaredesign concept of modularsoftware microservices communication architectural views and patterns lectures cloud computing architecture of cluster computing design of data centers open data centerplatforms fault tolerant system design lectures virtualization type and type virtualization virtual machine containers dockers lectures csl xx data management data management structured data relational database management unstructured data semi structured data nosql database management mongodb column database graph database xml json hdfs handling drift in data sensor data reliability at software and algorithmic level sensor data analysis techniques lectures csl xx data intensive processing systems data intensive processing systems architecture of large scale data processing systems hadoop apache spark storm parallel dataprocessingconceptssuchasmap reduce directedacyclicgraph resilient distributed datasets dynamic resource allocation partial shared computation storagearchitecture lectures textbook . bass l. clements p. kazman r. software architecture in practice rd edition addison wesley professional . martink. designingdata intensiveapplications thebigideasbehindreliable scalable andmaintainable systems st edition o reilly media self learning material . tylor r.n. medvidovic n. and dashofy e.m. software architecture foundation theory andpractice wiley preparatory course material . ieee transactions on knowledge and data engineering . international conference on data engineering level courses elective courses cse and ai ds title advanced arti cial intelligence number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . cover modern paradigms of ai that go beyond traditional learning. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . develop an understanding of modern concepts in ai and where they can be used. . design implement and apply novel ai techniques based on emerging real worldrequirements. contentsdecision making utility theory utility functions decision networks sequential decision problems partially observable mdps game theory lectures probabilistic reasoning over time hidden markov models kalman filters time series analysis lectures knowledgerepresentation informationextraction representationtechniques foundationsofontology ontological engineering situation calculus semantic networks description logic lectures planning planning with state space search partial order planning planning graphs planning withpropositional logic hierarchical tasknetworkplanning non deterministicdomains conditional planning continuous planning lectures embodied ai introduction to visual navigation synthetic and real environment embodied questionanswering in synthetic interactive and indoor environment introduction to ai habitat simulationplatform. lectures textbook . russel s. and norvig p. arti cial intelligence amodernapproach rdedition prenticehall reference books . yang q. intelligent planning adecompositionandabstractionbasedapproach springerverlag berlin heidelberg. level elective course course title advanced biometrics course no. csl department computer science and engineering ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electiveprerequisite pattern recognition and machine learning deeplearning machine learning antirequisite none objectives . to familiarize the students with types of biometrics including physical and behavioural modalities understanding biometric strengths weaknesses and limitations and biometric standards. . describe a few techniques for designing biometric systems learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . develop new biometric systems for real world applications and become familiar with variousstages of biometric system development. . develop an understanding of future direction and emerging technologies in biometrics. contentsintroduction biometric system design genesis of biometrics human body properties and biometricdata acquisition system architecture performance evaluation veri cation identi cation lectures traditional and emerging biometric modalities image signal processing fingerprint matching facerecognition iris modelling signature authentication biometric pattern recognition multi modalbiometrics lectures biometric security encryption cancelable biometricsand fuzzy vault lectures biometric devices security target design reliabilitydesign industry standards lectures biomedical applications of biometrics lectures text book . a.k. jain a. ross k. nandakumar introduction to biometrics springer. reference books . a.k. jain a. ross k. nandakumar eds. handbook of biometrics springer . . s.z. li a.k. jain eds. handbook of face recognition springer nd edition. . d. maltoni d. maio a. jain s. prabhakar eds. handbook of fingerprint recognition springer nd edition. . m.j. burge k.w. bowyer eds. handbook of iris recognition springer nd edition. . on line resources will be provided. level elective course title advanced computer graphics number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite computer graphics antirequisite objectivesthe instructor will . discusses fundamentals of d and d object modeling and rendering . explain the hardware and software related issues of computer graphics learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . understand fundamentals of graphics used in various real life applications . identify the performance characteristics of graphics algorithms . employ algorithm to model engineering problems when appropriate contentsintroduction review of d and d geometry viewingand clipping lectures curves and fractals parametric cubic curves b spline bezier hermite surfaces fractals and itsapplications lectures solid modeling representation of solids sweep and boundary representation constructive solidgeometry lectures illumination and shading surface detail shadows and transparency inter object re ections illumination models extended light sources ray tracing radiosity lectures imagebasedrendering imagesynthesis geometrybased plenopticfunction panorama lumigraph rendering virtual reality lectures animation introduction morphing character animationand facial animation lectures graphics hardware special purpose computer graphicsprocessors and accelerators lectures textbook . shirley m. fundamentals of computergraphics th edition crc press . vandam f. and hughes f. computer graphics principles and practice rd edition addision wesley reference books . mukundan r. advanced methods in computer graphics with examples in opengl springer . ruben h. computer graphics principles andpractice larsen and keller education self learning material . computer graphics nptel video lectures level elective course course title advanced machine learning course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electiveprerequisite prml introduction to ml ai antirequisite none objectivesthisisanadvancedcourseonmachinelearning. itisintendedforseniorundergraduateandgraduatestudentswhoalreadyhaveabackgroundinprorml.thecourseisdesignedasasetofspecial topicsthat will be covered through research papers and books. the course will focus on algorithms andmodels along with providing a good perspective of different real world applications. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . understand the algorithms and functioning of advanced techniques and concepts such as deeplearning distance metric learning and domain adaptation . understand the advantages and limitations of the algorithms and their potential applications . run several public domain machine learning toolboxes on real world databases such as mnist andcifar . design experiments for evaluation and analyze the results to test the effectiveness of individualcomponents of an algorithm contentskernel machines kernel properties kernels for structuredata and text multiple kernellearning generative models lectures variants of support vector machine hard and softmargin svm online svm distributed svm lectures pac theory lectures boosting adaboost gradient boosting lectures structured prediction and graphical models learningdirected and undirected models sampling mapinference and prediction variational inference causality lectures dictionary learning fundamentals regularization supervised and unsupervised dictionary learning transform learning lectures deep reinforcement learning lectures text books . n. cristianini j. s taylor an introduction to support vector machines and otherkernel based learning methods cambridge university press st edition. . b. scholkopf a. j. smola learning with kernels support vector machines regularization optimization and beyond the mit press st edition. . r. s. sutton a. g. barto reinforcement learning an introduction the mit press nd edition. . d. koller n. friedman probabilistic graphical models principles and techniques mit press. level elective course title ad hoc wireless networks number csl xx department cse ee l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite networks antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce the mathematical models and network protocol designs in wireless ad hocnetworks . provide a systematic exposition of network protocols and their cross layer interactions . to provide more advanced in depth networkingknowledge. uponcompletionof thiscourse studentswill beabletoapplytheknowledgeintheirnetworkingresearch.abroadperspectiveon the active research areas in wireless ad hoc networks learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . demonstrate advanced knowledge of networking and wireless networking in particular . compare different solutions for communications at each network layer . demonstrate knowledge of protocols used in wireless communications contentsbasicsof wirelessnetworksandmobilecomputing adhocnetworks introduction issuesinadhocwireless networks ad hoc wireless internet lectures mediaaccesscontrol inadhocandsensor networks macprotocolsfor adhocwirelessnetworks introduction issues in designing a mac protocol for adhocwirelessnetworks designgoalsof amac protocol for ad hoc wireless networks classi cation of mac protocols contention basedprotocols with reservation mechanisms. contention based mac protocols with schedulingmechanism mac protocols that use directional antennas other mac protocols network andtransport layer issues for ad hoc and sensor networks lectures routingprotocolsfor adhocwirelessnetworks introduction issuesindesigningaroutingprotocolfor ad hoc wireless networks classi cation of routing protocols table drive routing protocol on demand routing protocol hybrid routing protocol routing protocols with effective oodingmechanisms hierarchical routing protocols power aware routing protocols lectures transport layer protocols transport layer protocols for ad hoc wireless networks introduction issues in designing a transport layer protocol for ad hoc wireless networks design goals of atransportlayerprotocol foradhocwirelessnetworks classi cationoftransportlayersolutions tcpover ad hoc wireless networks other transport layer protocols for ad hoc wireless networks lectures security issuesforadhocnetworks security securityinwirelessadhocwirelessnetworks networksecurity requirements issues challenges in security provisioning network security attacks keymanagement secure routing in ad hoc wireless networks lectures qos for ad hoc networks quality of serviceinadhocwirelessnetworks introduction issuesandchallengesinprovidingqosinadhocwirelessnetworks classi cationofqossolutions maclayersolutions network layer solutions lectures advanced topics software de ned network sdn mesh networking energy issues andsensor networks lectures laboratory experimentsprogramming exercises usingns ns qualnet java and omnet textbook . siva ram murthy c. manoj b. s. . ad hoc wireless networks architectures andprotocols.phi pearson education . akyildiz ian f. and xudong wang .wirelessmesh networks. vol. . john wiley sons reference books . basagni s. conti m. giordano s. stojmenovic i. eds. . . mobile ad hoc networking.john wiley sons . perkins c. e. . ad hoc networking vol. . reading addison wesley level elective course . toh c. k. .ad hoc mobile wireless networks protocols and systems. pearson education . cheng x. huang x. du d. z. eds. . . adhocwirelessnetworking vol. .springerscience business media self learning material . computer networks mit opencourseware mobile and wireless networks and applications stanford university level elective course course title approximation algorithms course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type bouquet electiveprerequisite design and analysis of algorithms antirequisite none objectivestheobjectiveof thecourseistointroducegeneral purposetechniquesforlargeclassesofintractableoptimization problems. learning outcomesstudents will be able to .identify novel and signi cant open research questions in the eld. .apply their knowledge in the design and implementation of viable solutions to those problems. contentscombinatorial techniques metric tsp euclidean tsp fptas for knapsack greedy algorithms formakespan ptas for makespan local search the min degree spanning tree problem. lectures linear programming relaxations linear programming vertex cover set cover via dual tting set covervia the primal dual schema steiner forest facility location. lectures cuts metrical relaxations and embeddings basicembedding results and applications treeembeddings buyat bulk network design and l embeddings min multicut and metrical relaxation for sparsest cut roundingfor sparsest cut vial embeddings balancedcutsandtheir applications treeembeddingsvia random cuts. lectures random hyperplanes dimensionality reduction and hashing solving semide nite programs roundingsdps using random projections max cut dimensionality reduction via random projections approximate nearest neighbors localitysensitivehashing randomprojectionsandminhashing. lectures game theory sel sh algorithmic strategies costsharing schemes using primal dual algorithms. lectures text bookv. vazirani approximation algorithms springer verlag. reference books .m.r. garey d.s. johnson computers and intractability a guide to the theory ofnp completeness w. h. freeman company. .d. du k.ko x. hu design and analysis of approximation algorithms springer. level elective course course title arti cial intelligence in transportation course no. cs xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electivepre requisites none antirequisite none objectives . the course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the applications of ai intransportation systems. . the course would have a computer science avor to transportation with relevant case studies. learning outcomesat the end of this course students would be able to appreciate the tremendous ai driven impact ontransportation systems worldwide. contentstra c ow basics lectures continuum models of tra c ow lectures tra c modeling and control of freeways lectures network level tra c management lectures control of tra c signals lectures its intelligent transportation systems applications and case studies lectures sensor technologies and data requirements of its lectures overview of autonomous systems lectures driverless vehicles lectures vehicular localization techniques lectures future trends in transportation systems lectures paper discussions ipped mode lectures note please note that the course material would not be taken from a single book or resource. it would be acombination of textbook material research papers and other sources. textbooks . alam m. ferreira j. fonseca j. . introduction to intelligent transportation systems.in intelligent transportation systems pp. . springer cham. . lipson h. kurman m. . driverless intelligent cars and the road ahead. mit press. reference books . chowdhury m. a. sadek a. w. . fundamentals of intelligent transportation systemsplanning. artech house. . recent relevant rfcs internet drafts selected research papers from relevant venues mobicom mobisys sigcomm infocom ieee tmc acm mc r. self learning material . relevant research papers. level elective course title autonomous systems number cs xxdepartment idrp cse l t p c offered for b. tech mtech phd all branches type electiveprerequisite basics of linear algebra probability and statistics objectives . provide an understanding about autonomous semi autonomous systems like autonomousmobile robots and cars. learning outcomes . understand and use the methodologies to design model and implementation of autonomoussystems for real time applications. contents fractal i introduction to autonomous systems lectures introduction to autonomous systems properties of autonomous systems examples ofautonomous systems degree of autonomy abstract agent architectures environment and agent reactive utility based and behavior basedarchitectures. concrete agent architectures logical agents introduction to bayesian reasoning introduction to real time systems real time environment distributed solutions notion of time fault tolerance modeling real time systems fractal ii design of autonomous vehicles lectures architecture of autonomous vehicles processing pipeline vehicle networks sensors for navigation gps imu lidar camera visual odometry placerecognition extractionbased on range data localization noise and aliasing belief representation map representations probabilistic mapbased localization autonomous map building slam planning and reacting path planning and obstacle avoidance navigation architectures datafusion fractal iii multi agent systems lectures multi agent systems and organizations hierarchical systems peer to peer organization openness scalability emergent organization communication and coordination in distributed systems distributed planning and execution tasksharing coordination without communication game theory player games nash equilibrium strategy adversarial search iterative game andlearning pareto e ciency negotiation social choice mechanism design auction autonomous systems and human society ethics and trust in multi agent systems explainability text books . gerhard weiss ed. multiagent system second edition mit press. . roland siegwart illahrezanourbakhsh davidescaramuzza introductiontoautonomousmobile robots mit press. reference books . michael wooldridge an introduction to multi agent systems nd ed . wiley . stuart j. russell and peter norvig arti cial intelligence a modern approach thedition pearson press . hermann kopetz. . real time systems nd ed . kluwer academic publishers . choset h. m. hutchinson s. lynch k. m. kantor g. burgard w. kavraki l. e. thrun s. . principles of robot motion theory algorithms and implementation. mit press. other study materialsresearch papers to be shared in class online course material level elective course title bio image computing number csl department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite computer programming linear algebra probabilityand statistics antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . provide details of bio signal and medical image acquisition process . explain information extraction and image analysis techniques using machine learning withemphasis on the eld of healthcare agriculture and environment learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . understand different imaging modalities and acquisition process . apply machine learning techniques for bio signal interpretation image representation and analysis contentscsl xx bio signal acquisition and representation introduction overview of biological signals and biomedical imaging modalities ecg nmrspectroscopy electron microscopy magnetic resonance imaging x ray computed tomography positron emission tomography ultrasound elastography optical imagingandothers noiseanderrorpropagation in biomedical signals and image data lectures visualization sectioning multimodal images overlays rendering surfaces and volumes lectures csl xx machine learning for bio signal analysis reconstruction mathematical models of image regularity random elds practical data sampling andacquisition schemes lectures restoration deconvolution degradation models forcorrupted and missing data bayesian graphicalmodeling and inference regression methods for ltering of ct mri ultrasound and other images lectures image segmentation object delineation classi cation clustering graph partitioning classi cation mixture models expectation maximization variational methods using geometric and statisticalmodeling computer aided diagnosis lectures registration deformation models optimization algorithms d d registration multi modal registration lectures csl xx deep learning for bio imaging enhancement segmentationof anatomical structures subcellular objects cells learningwithlittleorno training data spatial transformer network for registration image based phenotyping analysis ofradio genomic data lectures analysis of motion tracking of cells tissues organisms and particles lectures interactive image analysis human in loop image interpretation lectures laboratory experimentsultrasound image enhancement tumor segmentation in brats dataset registration of mri images etc. textbook . wu g. machine learning and medical imaging elsevier. . epstein c.l. mathematics of medical imaging prentice hall. . bankman i. handbookof medical imageprocessingandanalysis nd edition academicpress. preparatory course material . bishop c. pattern recognition and machinelearning springer. level elective course title blockchain course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd. type electiveprerequisite cryptography antirequisite objectivesthe instructor will . explain how blockchain technology works . integrate blockchain technology into the current business processes to make them secure learning outcomes . understand what and why of blockchain . explore major components of blockchain and identify a use case for a blockchainapplication create their own blockchain network application contentsintroduction to blockchain digital trust asset transactions distributed ledger technology types ofnetwork components of blockchain mining double spending attack attack. lectures pki and cryptography private keys cryptography publickeys cryptography hashing digital signature. lectures consensus byzantine fault proof of work proof ofstake. lectures cryptocurrency bitcoin creation and economy limitedsupply and de ation hacks ethereum concept andethereum classic monero zcash zero knowledge proofs etc. lectures permissioned blockchains permissionless versus permissionedblockchains lectures hyperledger fabric hyperledger architecture membership blockchain transaction chaincode hyperledgerfabric features of hyperledger fabric demo. lectures blockchain applications building on the blockchain ethereum interaction smart contract and token fungible non fungible languages payment escrow micro payments decentralized lotteriesblockchain as a service. lectures textbooka. bahga v. madisetti blockchain applications a hands on approach vpt. self learning material . m. swan blockchain blueprint for a new economy o reilly media. . r. wattenhofer the science of the blockchain createspace independent publishingplatform. . i. bashir mastering blockchain packt publishing ltd. . k.e. levy book smart not street smart blockchain based smart contracts and the social workingsof law engaging science technology and society vol. pp. . preparatory course materialmit online blockchain course learn blockchain technology level elective course course title compiler design course no. csl xx department computer science and engineering structure l t p d c offered for b.tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite maths for computing antirequisite objectives . to introduce key challenges for modern compilers and runtime systems . to explain various optimization techniques of a typical compilation work ow. learning outcomes . to learn about compilation techniques for obtaining high performance on moderncomputer architectures. . to analyze and optimize various components of compilation stages contentsrepresenting programs abstract syntax tree control flow graph data ow graph static singleassignment control dependence graph program dependence graph call graph. lectures analysis transformation algorithms data ow analysis interprocedural analysis pointer analysis rule based analyses and transformations. constraint based analysis. lectures applications scalar optimizations loop optimizations object oriented optimizations registerallocation program veri cation bug nding. lectures advanced topics just in time compilation memorymanagement edge architecture compilation power aware compilation machine speci c optimizations lectures . text booksk.d. cooper l.torczon engineering a compiler morgan kaufmann nd edition.s. muchnick advanced compiler design implementation morgan kaufmann. reference books . y.n. srikant p.shankar eds. the compiler design handbook optimizations andmachine code generation crc press nd edition. . a.v. aho m.s. lam r. sethi j.d. ullman compilers principles techniques and tools addison wesley nd edition. . r. allen k. kennedy optimizing compilers for modern architectures a dependencebased approach morgan kaufmann st edition. . m. wolfe high performance compilers for parallel computing addison wesley. . ieee and acm digital library. self learning materialnptel lecture level elective course course title complexity theory course no. csl department computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse m.tech cse ph.d. type electiveprerequisite maths for computing data structures andalgorithms antirequisite objectivesthe course provides a challenging introduction to some of the central ideas of theoretical computerscience. it attempts to present a vision of computer science beyond computers. learning outcomesstudents are expected to understand . the theory of classical complexity classes and its challenges. . the state of the art in the eld of complexity theory. contentsbasic complexity classes the computational model np and np completeness diagonalization spacecomplexity the polynomial hierarchy and alternations circuits randomized computation interactiveproofs complexity of counting complexity issues in cryptography. lectures lower bounds for concrete computational models decision trees communication complexity circuitlower bounds algebraic computation models. lectures advancedtopics averagecasecomplexity levin stheory derandomization expandersandextractors hardness ampli cation and error correcting codes pcp and hardness of approximation logic incomplexity theory quantum computation. lectures text bookss. arora b. barak computational complexity a modern approach cambridge universitypress st edition. self learningmitlecture notes automata computability and complexity electrical engineering and computerscience level elective course title computational microeconomics number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech type electiveprerequisite design and analysis of algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . familiarize with the market design . focus on algorithms to clear the market . familiarize with the algorithmic game theory learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . design market . use computer science knowledge to solve economic problems contentsintroduction to market design introduction to varioustypes of auctions bidding languages matchingmarket voting. lectures auction myerson s lemma knapsack auction revenue maximisingauction exchanges. lectures matching market kidney exchange stable matching various notions of optimal matching. lectures noncooperative game theory self interested agents price of anarchy non atomic and atomic modelsof sel sh routing. lectures games in normal form pareto optimality nash equilibria various solution concepts and theircomputation. lectures games in extensive form backwards induction subgameperfect equilibrium imperfect information equilibrium re nements computing equilibria. lectures text bookshoham y. brown k.l. multiagent systems algorithmic game theoretic and logicalfoundations cambridge university press. reference booksroughgarden t. twenty lectures on algorithmic game theory cambridge university press. self learning material level elective course title computational optimization number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce various terminologies concepts and algorithms related to classical heuristic andnature inspired optimization algorithms . discuss their applications in real world scenarios learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . utilize state of the art heuristic optimization algorithms in their research activities . design and propose new and hybrid optimization algorithms . customize heuristic optimization algorithms for special applications contentsintroduction de nitions and concepts optimization operational research or engineeringoptimization de nitionof anoptimizationproblem feasibilityproblem classi cationofoptimizationproblems classi cation of optimizationtechniques heuristicalgorithmsvs. metaheuristics swarmintelligence population basedoptimization multi objectiveoptimization parallelization evaluationofthe optimization algorithms lectures overview of classical optimization techniques linear programming nonlinear programming lectures overviewof heuristic optimization algorithms neighborhood search hill climbing methods greedyalgorithms simulated annealing lectures overviewof natureinspiredoptimizationalgorithms evolutionaryalgorithms tabusearch antcolonyoptimization particle swarm optimization lectures simulated annealing real annealing and simulated annealing metropolis algorithm simulatedannealing algorithm continuous simulated annealing one loop simulated annealing temperaturescheduling convergence of simulated annealing applications normalization of the parameters tuning the parameters of an algorithm lectures evolutionary algorithms methods of encoding operators of evolution models of evolution geneticalgorithms steady stategeneticalgorithms geneticprogramming memeticalgorithms differentialevolution lectures tabu search basic tabu search short term memory long term memory diversi cation andintensi cation continuous tabu search lectures ant colony optimization collectivebehavior of social insects basicacoalgorithms ant algorithmsfor tsp adaptation to continuous problems applications lectures particle swarm optimization canonical pso algorithm important parameters neighborhoodtopologies lectures textbook .michalewicz z. and fogel d.b. how to solveit modern heuristics nd edition springer .simon d. evolutionary optimization algorithms wiley .yang x.s. nature inspired metaheuristicalgorithms luniver press reference books . rao s.s. engineering optimization theory and practice rd edition new ageinternational publishers self learning material . nptel traditional and non traditional optimization tools level elective course title computational social choice theory number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite design and analysis of algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . familiarize with mechanisms for collective decision making . focus on interface of social choice theory with theoretical computer science . enable students to conduct research in this fast growing eld learning outcomesstudents will have the ability to . understand the problems and research directions in computational social choice. . mathematically formulate the problems that arise in society and design e cient rules forthese problems. . analyse computational complexity of problems in social choice. contentsintroduction to voting theory social choice functions voting rules and their axiomatic study. lectures computational hardness and algorithms for voting rules condorcet minimax dodgson s rule andkemeny. lectures manipulation in voting various means of manipulation strategic voting bribery control computationalhardness and algorithms. lectures multiwinner election voting rules and their computational complexity. lectures matching under preferences introduction to stablematching gale shapley algorithm hospital residentproblem stable roommate problem. lectures manipulation in matching means of manipulations computational hardness and algorithms. lectures introduction to fair allocation basic terminologies fairness and e ciency criteria. lectures fair allocation of goods fair allocation of indivisibleand divisible goods. lectures text book . brandt f. conitzer v. endriss u. lang j. procaccia a.d. . handbook ofcomputational social choice. cambridge university press. . gus eld d. irving r.w. . the stable marriage problem structure and algorithms. mit press . manlove d. . algorithmics of matching under preferences. world scienti c reference books . endriss u. . trends in computational social choice. lulu. com . lecture notes on fair division by u. endriss level elective course title computer graphics number csl department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite computer graphics csl xx objectivesthe instructor will . provide a thorough introduction to computer graphics techniques focusing on d and dmodelling image synthesis and rendering learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . explain and create interactive graphics application . implement graphics primitives . synthesize and render images for animation and visualization contentscsl xx introduction to graphical primitives introduction overviewofcomputergraphics representingpictures preparing presenting interactingwith pictures for presentations scan conversion d geometric primitives area filling algorithms.clipping algorithms anti aliasingtransformations and viewing d and d transformations matrix representations homogeneouscoordinates viewing pipeline window to viewport coordinate transformation clipping operations viewport clipping d viewing. csl xx graphical object representation curves and surfaces conics parametric and non parametric forms bezier bernsteinpolynomials curves cubic splines b splines quadratic surfaces bezier surfaces and nurbs d modelling. csl xx graphics rendering hidden surfaces depth comparison z buffer algorithm back face detection bsp tree method theprinter s algorithm scan line algorithm hidden line elimination wire frame methods fractal geometry.color shadingmodels phong sshadingmodel gouraudshading shadowsandbackground colormodels photo realistic rendering animation and opengl primitives functions pipeline sampleprogramsfor drawing d dobjects eventhandlingandviewmanipulation introductiontogpuandanimation textbook . j. d. foley a. van dam s. k. feiner and j. f. hughes computer graphics principles andpractice addison wesley nd edition in c . . d. f. rogers and j. a. adams mathematical elements for computer graphics mcgraw hill nd edition . self learning material . blender opengl preparatory course material .department of computer science and engineering indian institute of technology madras level elective course title computer network protocols and applications number cs xxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite computernetworks objectives . tounderstandtheorganizationofcomputernetworks factorsin uencingtheperformanceofcomputer networks and the reasons for having a variety of different types of networks. . to understand the internet structure various protocols of the internet and how theseprotocols address the standard problems of networking and the internet. . to introduce some advanced concepts both in the wired as well as wireless networks. learning outcomes . familiarity with the essential protocols of computer networks in terms of design implementation and operations. . students would be able to appreciate different types of wired and wireless networks. contents introduction review of the internet architectureand layering lectures application layer application layer protocols end to enddata multimedia networking applications image audio video compression lectures transport layer tcp congestion and ow control flow rate fairness algorithms fair queueingalgorithms congestion avoidance and control algorithms for congestion avoidance in computernetworks congestion control for high bandwidth delay product networks lectures network layer end to end routing algorithm intra and inter domain routing algorithms e.g. bgp mpls stablepathsproblemandsel shroutingalgorithms mobilityaspectsandmobileip routingin ad hoc and wireless networks lectures software de ned networks and network virtualization openflow sdn control mininet networkfunction virtualization networking in dockers. lectures advanced topics vpn data centre networking contentdelivery networks overlay networks lowpower wide range communication tv whitespaces lectures text book . k.w. ross j.f. kurose computer networks a top down approach pearson thedition. reference books . w. stallings data and computer communications pearson th edition. . l.l. peterson b.s. davie computer networks a systems approach morgankaufmann th edition. supplementary resources . tcp ip tutorial and technical overview ibm redbook download from tcp ip guide charles m. kozierok available online nptel online lectures selected research papers level elective course title computer vision course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite linear algebra objectivesthe instructor will . provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms behind some ofthe remarkable success of computer vision . impart working expertise by means of programming assignments and a project learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . learn and appreciate the usage and implications of various computer vision techniquesin real world scenarios . design and implement basic applications of computer vision contentsintroduction the three r s recognition reconstruction reorganization lecture fundamentals formation filtering transformation alignment color lectures image restoration spatial processing and wavelet basedprocessing lectures geometry homography warping epipolar geometry stereo structure from motion optical ow lectures segmentation key point extraction region segmentation e.g. boosting graph cut and level set ransac lectures feature description and matching key point description handcrafted feature extraction sift lbp lectures deep learning based segmentation and recognition dl based object detection e.g. mask rcnn yolo semantic segmentation convolutional neural network cnn based approaches to visualrecognition lectures applications multimodal and multitask applications lectures textbooks . r. hartley a. zisserman multiple view geometry in computer vision cambridgeuniversity press nd edition. . r. szeliski computer vision algorithms and applications springer verlag london. reference books . research literature level elective course title crowd sourcing and human computing number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all m.tech type electiveprerequisite data structures algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . familiarize with the techniques to manage the crowd . focus on building intelligent systems that involve a combination of computersand humans collaborating seamlessly over the internet learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . program the crowd . apply usability principles for designing crowd tasks that elicit high quality responses . use statistical methods to improve the quality of the work received . build systems that interface with crowd labor in real time contentsintroduction to crowdsourcing and human computation introduction history connections tosocial computing collective intelligence and management science lectures human computation algorithms design patterns casestudy discussion lectures usability engineering for crowdsourcing input agreementmechanisms output agreementmechanisms lectures gold standards consensus algorithms incentive mechanisms gami cation lectures real time crowdsourcing queuing theory for predictingworker availability ensemble learning crowd agents lectures crowdsourcing subjective tasks social q a expertisein crowdsourcing local crowdsourcing community sourcing crowd funding citizen science lectures task routing push and pull approaches lectures crowds applications crowds mechanical turk social media applications computer vision nlp lectures text booklaw e. ahn ahn l. . human computation an integrated approach to learning from thecrowd morgan claypool publishers. reference books . ghosh a. lease m. .human computation andcrowdsourcing. proceedings ofthe fourth aaai conference . lease m. alonso o. crowdsourcing and human computation introduction. in alhajj r. roknej. eds encyclopedia of social network analysis and mining. springer new york. self learning material level elective course title cryptography number csl department computer science l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite objectivesintroduce students to the domain of symmetric and asymmetric cryptography and develop anappreciation for some applications in which cryptography is used in real life. learning outcomes . learn to model security of various cryptographic primitives as an adversarial game. . learnthedesignprinciplesof blockciphers streamciphers hashfunctions mac s publickeyencryption and digital signatures. . identify novel and signi cant open research questions in the eld. . using cryptographic primitives to design some real life protocols such as zkp coin tossing over insecure channel and mpc. contents foundations lectures attacking toy ciphers kerckhoff slaw perfect security owf prg prf prpsymmetric key cryptography lectures block ciphers stream ciphers hash functions mac authenticated encryption.asymmetric key cryptography lectures dkhe rsa el gamal cryptosystems with requiredmathematical foundations ellipticcurvecryptography digital signatures publickeyinfrastructureanddigital certi cates.cryptographicprotocols lectures securemultipartycomputation zeroknowledgeproofs oblivioustransfer etc. textbooks . katz lindell theory of modern cryptography crc press rd edition. . hoffstein p pher silverman introduction to mathematical cryptography self learning material . level elective course course title cybersecurity course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b. tech mtech ph. d. type electiveprerequisite computer networks anti req security and itsapplications objectives . the instructor will provide the skills neededtoprotect networks secureelectronicassets prevent attacks ensure the privacy of your customers and build secureinfrastructure learning outcomes . to protect data and respond to threats that occur over the internet . design and implement risk analysis security policies and damage assessment . an ability to apply security principles andpracticestotheenvironment hardware software and human aspects of a system. contents introduction to cyber security internet governance challenges and constraints cyberthreats. lectures cyber securityvulnerabilitiesandcyber securitysafeguards cyber security vulnerabilities safeguards access control authentication biometrics deception denial of service filters ethical hacking firewalls response scanning security policy threat management. lectures cryptography shannon s approach to cryptography measures of security perfect secrecy de nition of entropy one time pad symmetric key cryptography cryptographic hashfunctions authentication public key cryptosystems key distribution and key agreementprotocols lectures securing web application services and servers basic security for http applications andservices basic security for soap services identity management and web services authorization patterns security considerations challenges. lectures network security tcp ip threats theipsecprotocol thesslandtlsprotocols firewallsandvirtual privatenetworks vpns electronicmail security worms ddosattacks bgbandsecurity considerations lectures intrusion detection and prevention intrusion detection and prevention techniques anti malware software security informationmanagement networksessionanalysis systemintegrity validation. lectures cyberspace and the law cyber security regulations roles of international law state andprivate sector in cyberspace cyber security standards. the indian cyberspace nationalcyber security policy. lectures cyber forensics handlingpreliminary investigations controllinganinvestigation conductingdisk basedanalysis investigatinginformation hiding tracinginternetaccess tracingmemoryin real time. lectures laboratory . design and implementation of a simple client server model and running applicationusing sockets and tcp ip. . to make students aware of the insecurity of default passwords printed passwordsand passwords transmitted in plain text. . to teach students how to use ssh for secure le transfer or for accessing localcomputers using port forwarding technique. . comparison between telnet and ssh for secure connection . avispa tool for the automated validation of internet security protocols andapplications level elective coursetext book . c.j. hoofnagle federal trade commission privacy law and policy cambridge university press . . stallings w. . cryptography and network security e. pearson educationindia reference book . douglas r. stinson maura b. paterson . cryptography theory and practice. e chapman and hall crc . p.w. singer a. friedman cybersecurity what everyone needs to know oup st edition. supplementary resource level elective course title data visualization number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite data engineering dbms antirequisite data visualization csl xx objectivesthe instructor will . provide background to understand various aspects of data visualization . discuss various principles of visualizing heterogeneous types of data learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . present data with visual representations for the target audience task and data . analyze critique and revise data visualizations . apply appropriate design principles in the creation of presentations and visualizations contentsvisual queries process of seeing the act of perception design implications distributedcognition visual search strategies lectures data and visualization data type coordinate systems scale lectures visualization design amount distribution proportion trends time series geospatial lectures narratives telling storieswithdata sequencing visualizationrhetoric text visualization lectures mapping and cartography the cartogram value by areamapping lectures optimal space usage aspect ratioselection geometry aesthetics wilkinson salgorithmand its extension lectures networks scalable versatile and simple constrained graph layout visualization ofadjacency multiplenetworkanalysisandvisualization visualizingonlinesocial networks lectures animationandcolor trendvisualization transitionsinstatistical datagraphics graphswithradial layout cartoons color and information infographics lectures textbook . tufte e. the visual display of quantitative information nd edition graphicspress . tufte e. envisioning information graphicspress self learning material . wilke c.o. fundamentals of data visualization a primer on makinginformative and compelling figures o reilly media . ware c. and kaufman m. visual thinking for design. burlington morgankaufmann publishers . wong d. the wall street journal guidetoinformationgraphics thedosanddon ts of presenting data facts and gures newyork w.w. norton company preparatory course material . data visualization course level elective course title digital image analysis number cslxxxdepartment computer science and engineering ee l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite linear algebra antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . to introduce the origin and formation of digital imaging. . to develop the understanding of different typesof imagingtechniquesfor differentpurposes. . to equip the students with various possible applications of image analysis. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . enhance image in spatial and frequency domain. . implement various aspects of image segmentation and compression. contentsdigital image fundamentals imagemodeling samplingandquantization imaginggeometry digital geometry image acquisition systems different types of digital images lectures image transforms basic transforms spatial and frequency domain transforms lectures image enhancement point processing interpolation enhancement in spatial domain enhancement in frequency domain lectures color imageprocessings color representation lawsof colormatching chromaticitydiagram color enhancement color image segmentation color edge detection lectures imagecompression lossy andlosslesscompressionschemes predictionbasedcompressionschemes vector quantization sub band encoding schemes jpeg compression standard lectures morphology dilation erosion opening closing hit and miss transform thinning extensiontograyscale morphology euler technique lectures segmentation segmentation of grey level images watershed algorithmfor segmentinggreylevel image lectures feature detection fourier descriptors shape features object matching features lectures textbook . c. gonzalez r.e. woods digital image processing prentice hall thedition. . a.k. jain fundamentals of digital image processing prentice hall. self learning material level elective course course title distributed algorithms course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type bouquet electiveprerequisite design and analysis of algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe objective of the course is to introduce the distributed algorithms in real world systems learning outcomesstudents will be able to .introduce the most important basic results in the area of distributed algorithms and prepareinterested students to begin independent research or take a more advanced course indistributed algorithms. .implement distributed algorithms in real world distributed computing platforms .understand and identify applications of distributed algorithms in real world systems contentsintroduction to distributed computing models model of a distributed system asynchronousmessage passing model time and message complexity safety and liveness properties clocksynchronization lectures leader election logical clocks and causality leaderelection in rings asynchronous leaderelection with identities synchronous leader election by abusing the synchronous model logical clocks and vector clocks snapshots and synchronization lectures message ordering and group communication terminationdetection algorithms andreasoning with knowledge lectures distributed mutual exclusion algorithms lamport s algorithm ricart agrawala algorithm and deadlock detection algorithms lectures global predicate detection modalities on predicates centralized algorithm for relationalpredicates conjunctive predicates distributed algorithms for conjunctive predicates lectures distributed shared memory memory consistency models shared memory mutual exclusionandwait freedom lectures checkpointing and rollback recovery checkpoint basedrecoveryandlog based rollbackrecovery lectures consensus and agreement agreement in a failure free system synchronous orasynchronous agreement in message passing synchronous systems with failures agreement in asynchronous message passing systems with failures wait free sharedmemory consensus in asynchronous systems lectures distributed programming environments communication primitives selected case studies lectures text booka.d. kshemkalyani m. singhal distributed computing principles algorithms andsystems cambridge university press. reference books . n. lynch distributed algorithms morgan kaufmann st edition. . g. tel introduction to distributed algorithms cambridge university press ndedition. level elective course course title distributed database systems course no. cs xxdepartment computer science engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electiveprerequisites operating systems database systems computer networks antirequisite none objectiveto understand and appreciate concepts of distributed database design and its associatedissues of consistency concurrency optimization integrity reliability privacy and security. learning outcomeability to understand the need for distributed database systems and its related complexitiespertaining to fragmentation replication availability concurrency consistency and recovery. contentsintroduction distributed data processing concepts what is a ddbs advantages disadvantages and problem areas. lectures distributed database management system architectures transparencies architecture globaldirectory concepts and issues. lectures distributed database design design strategies designissues fragmentation data allocation. lectures semantics data control view management data security semantic integrity control. lectures query processing objectives characterization ofprocessors layers of processing querydecomposition data localization. lectures query optimization factors centralized query optimization fragmented query ordering query optimization algorithms. lectures transaction management goals properties models. lectures concurrency control concurrency control in centralizedsystems concurrency control inddbss algorithms deadlock management. lectures reliability issues and types of failures reliabilitytechniques commit protocols recoveryprotocols. lectures other avenues parallel database systems multi databases. lectures reference bookss. ceri g. pelagatti distributed databases principles and systems mcgraw hill stedition reprint .m.t. zsu p. valduriez principles of distributed database systems springer rdedition. level elective course course title edge and fog computing course no. csl xxdepartment computer science engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type electiveprerequisite operating systems computer networks antirequisite none objectivesthis course will introduce design concepts frameworks and applications in edge computing tothe audience learning outcomes students are expected to .understand various edge devices and their ecosystems issues and challenges .develop edge based distributed computing platforms and applications contentsintroduction of edge and fog computing internet ofthings iot and new computingparadigms fog computing a platform for internet of things and analytics emergence of edgecomputing legal aspects of operating iot applications in the fog. lectures edge architecture multi tier cloud computing framework data services with clouds at home leveraging mobile devices to provide cloud service at the edge fast scalable and secureonloading of edge functions. lectures networking for edge fog integrating iot fog cloud infrastructures system modeling andresearch challenges management and orchestration of network slices in g fog edge andclouds. lectures system design optimization problems in fog and edgecomputing middleware for fog andedge computing design issues a lightweight container middleware for edge cloudarchitectures. lectures data processing data management in fog computing predictive analysis to support fogapplication deployment using machine learning for protecting the security and privacy ofinternet of things iot systems fog computing realization for big data analytics. lectures applicationsandcasestudies fogcomputingrealizationforbigdataanalytics exploitingfogcomputing in health monitoring smart surveillance video streamprocessingat theedgeforreal time human objects tracking fog computing model for evolving smart transportationapplications. lectures text bookr. buyya s.n. srirama fog and edge computing principles and paradigms wiley blackwell . level elective course title embedded systems number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite computer organization and architecture antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . explain the design of embedded systems and introduce concepts of differentarchitectures and programming languages of embedded processors. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . program and to design embedded system using embedded processors . design embedded ai systems . use different ide and debugging tools contentsintroduction review of embedded computing embeddedsystem design process lectures architectures of embedded processors architecture of armcortex m dsp and graphicsprocessors memory system mechanism caches memory management units and addresstranslation interfacing lectures programmingandsoftware modelsfor program data owgraphs candassemblylanguageprogramming of arm cortex m hardware software co design lectures embedded operating systems linux processesandreal timeoperatingsystems multi ratesystem scheduling algorithms lectures embedded ai basics of embedded learning and adaptive systems intelligent sensors rule based systems hardware accelerators for ai heterogeneous memory systemdesign current trends and future directions lectures textbook . wolf m. computers as components principles of embedded computingsystem design rd edition elsevier. . yiu j. thede nitiveguidetoarmcortexm andm processors rd edition elsevier. . alippi c. intelligence for embedded systems a methodological approach springer. preparatory course material . mazidi m.a. the microcontroller and embedded systems usingassembly and c nd edition pearson education india. level elective course title environmental informatics number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all m.tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite data structure and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce techniques for environmental modeling environmental databases andinformation systems. learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . apply the techniques for environment modeling on typical applications ofenvironment monitoring and protection. . appreciate the multidisciplinary nature of environmental problems. contentsintroduction to environmental informatics environmental objects characterisation of anenvironmental system environmental metadata. lectures data capture and data storage introduction objecttaxonomies mapping theenvironment advanced techniques. lectures environmental sampling sampling design essentialsfor sampling of environmental data satellite imagery lectures hydrological modeling rainfall runoff models precipitationmodels climate models. lectures geographical information systems lectures environmental data analysis scales of operation ofenvironmental data re sampling ofenvironmental data approximation of environmental data trend estimation of environmentaldata lectures environmental statistics probability distributionsof environmental data statistical measures statistical tests regression and correlation lectures environmental time series fourier analysis stationaryprocesses time correlation functions frequency functions lectures environmental simulation models modelling procedure types and classi cation ofmathematical models process identi cation an eutrophication simulator. lectures text book . g nther o. . environmental information systems. springer berlin. . box g. e. p. jenkins g. m. reinsel g. c. . time series analysis. th ed. prenticehall englewood cliffs. reference booksavouris n. m. and page b. eds. . environmental informatics methodology andapplications of environmental information processing. kluwer dordrecht. level elective course course title ethics policy law and regulations in ai course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electiveprerequisite pattern recognition and machine learning orml or iml ai antirequisite none objectives . to understand implications and consequences of ethics law regulations data privacy ownership data marketplace etc policy in ai learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to develop an understanding of . rami cations of ai technologies on society . ethical aspects of ai ml and ds systems . data privacy ownership and ipr issues . law regulations liabilities and policies of ai ml and ds systems contentsethics in ailaw and regulationsiprpoliciescase studies text book . online resources . will be added in future reference books level elective course title fundamentals of machine learning number csl department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for masters and phd in non cs ai programs type electiveprerequisite bridge course of programming python antirequisite none objectives . to introduce the fundamental theories of machine learning. . toequipthestudentswithknowledgeof implementationofdataanalysisandevaluationof machine learning algorithms. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . explain the basic concepts of ml driven data analysis . utilizethetoolsandtechniquesfor collecting storing securing retrieving andanalyzingdata of different modalities contentsintroduction to probability bayes theorem random variable distribution function andprobability density mass function linear algebra. lectures evaluating ml models precision recall speci city sensitivity predictive value roc curve cross validation over tting under tting bias and interpretability of ml models lectures unsupervised learning feature selection clustering missing data lectures supervised machine learning models regression analysis bayes classi cation parameterestimation maximum likelihood estimator k nearest neighbor decision trees gradientdescent neural networks ensemble learning lectures introduction to deep learning cnn autoencoder rnn lectures textbook . mitchell tom . machine learning tata mcgraw hill . wu g. machine learning and medical imaging elsevier. reference . level elective course title gpu programming number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite data structures and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . provide background to understand various aspects of graphics processing unit gpu . introduce parallel programming using gpus. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . explain various concepts involving gpu programming . implement programs of gpu . debug and pro le parallel programs. contentsintroduction history graphics processors graphics processing units gpgpus. clockspeeds cpu gpucomparisons heterogeneity.accelerators parallel programming cuda opencl openacc lectures hello world computation kernels launch parameters thread hierarchy warps wavefronts threadblocks workgroups streamingmultiprocessors d d dthreadmapping deviceproperties simple programs lectures support debugging gpu programs. pro ling pro letools performance aspects lectures memory memory hierarchy dram global local shared private local textures constantmemory pointers parameter passing arrays and dynamic memory multi dimensionalarrays memory allocation memory copying across devices programs with matrices performance evaluation with different memories lectures synchronization memoryconsistency.barriers local versusglobal atomics memoryfence pre x sum reduction. programs for concurrent data structures such as worklists linked lists synchronization across cpu and gpu lectures functions device functions host functions kernels functors using libraries such asthrust developing libraries lectures streams asynchronous processing tasks task dependence overlapped data transfers default stream synchronization with streams events event based synchronization overlapping data transfer and kernel execution pitfalls lectures advanced topics case studies dynamic parallelism uni ed virtual memory multi gpuprocessing peer access heterogeneous processing lectures textbook . kirk d. and hwu w. programming massively parallel processors a hands onapproach hwu morgan kaufman self learning material . cook s. cudaprogramming adeveloper sguidetoparallel computingwithgpus morgan kaufman preparatory course material . introduction to parallel programming level elective course title graph theoretic algorithms number cs xxxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite algorithm design and analysis antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will introduce and address graph problems using algorithm designprinciples. discuss graph theoretic algorithms in real worldscenarios. learning outcomesto give the student further exposure to the design analysis and application of algorithms forproblems de ned on graphs.formulate and solve real world problems using the mathematical foundations of graphtheory. contentsintroduction to graphs. lectures max flow min cut theorem algorithms for min cut and max ow maximum matching hall stheorem algorithms for computing maximum matching in weighted and unweighted graphs. lectures vertex and edge coloring of graphs independent set. lectures interval graphs perfect elimination orders comparability graphs interval graphrecognition friends of interval graphs. lectures trees and treewidth. lectures planar graphs problems in planar graphs maximum cut. lectures planarity testing triangulated graphs friends of planar graphs hereditary properties. lectures textbooksa. brandst dt v.b. le j.p. spinrad graph classes a survey siam monographson discrete mathematics and applications siam.t. nishizeki n. chiba planar graphs theory and algorithms north hollandpublisher.m.c. golumbic algorithmic graph theory and perfect graphs academic press ndedition. self learning materialt. biedl lecture notes of a graduate course university of waterloo. level elective course title graph theory and applications number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce variousterminologies conceptsandalgorithmsrelatedtographs anddiscusstheir applications in real world scenarios. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . formulate and solve real world problems usingthemathematical foundationsof graphtheory. contentspreliminaries graphs isomorphism subgraphs matrix representations degree operationson graphs degree sequences lectures connected graphs and shortest paths walks trails paths connected graphs distance cut vertices cut edges blocks connectivity weighted graphs shortest path algorithms lectures trees characterizations number of trees minimumspanning trees lectures special classes of graphs bipartite graphs linegraphs chordal graphs lectures eulerian graphs characterization fleury s algorithm chinese postman problem lectures hamilton graphs necessary conditions and su cientconditions lectures independent sets coverings matchings basic equations matchings in bipartite graphs perfect matchings greedy and approximation algorithms lectures vertex colorings chromatic number and cliques greedy coloring algorithm coloring ofchordal graphs brook s theorem lectures edge colorings gupta vizing theorem class graphs and class graphs equitableedge coloring lectures planar graphs basic concepts euler s formula polyhedrons and planar graphs characterizations planarity testing color theorem lectures directed graphs out degree in degree connectivity orientation eulerian directed graphs hamilton directed graphs lectures applications biology social sciences engineering computer science lectures textbook . west d.b. introduction to graph theory nd edition prentice hall of india . deo n. graphtheory withapplicationtoengineeringandcomputer science prentice hall of india reference books . research literature self learning material . nptel graph theory for cse nptel graph theory for mathematics level elective course title hardware software co design number eel xx cs xxdepartment cse electrical engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. type electiveprerequisite digital design antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will give overview of the cooperative design of hardware and software components.provide the understanding of uni cation of currently separate hardware and software paths learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to achieve system level objectives by exploiting the synergism of hardware and softwarethrough their concurrent design.understand the movement of functionality between hardware and software. contentsintroduction to hardware software co design design process application domains designtechnologies. lectures data ow modeling implementation in software and hardware analysis of control ow anddata ow finite state machine with datapath custom hardware microprogrammedarchitecture system on chip. lectures codesign methodologies model representation hardware software mapping partitioning scheduling and allocation software code optimization. lectures hardware software interfaces principles of hardware software communication on chipbuses memory mapped interface coprocessor interface. lectures codesign cad tools ptolemy project. lectures textbookp.r. schaumont a practical introduction to hardware software codesign springer st edition.g. de micheli m. sami hardware software co design springer. level elective course title health informatics number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all m.tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite data structure and algorithms antirequisite none objectives . develop knowledge about problems and challenges that health informatics addresses . to develop an understanding of different types of data exchange formats and standardstechniques for different purposes. . to equip the students with various possible applications of digital data analysis inhealthcare. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply basic knowledge to the research and practice of health informatics . demonstrate basic skills and knowledge in health informatics for application in futurehealth related careers . utilize the tools and techniques for collecting storing securing retrieving andreporting health care data and information contentsintroduction overview health data information and knowledge electronic health records systemarchitectureforehrs ambulatoryehrfunctionsandinteroperability personal healthrecords and decision aids. lectures health care information systems healthcare data standards overview methods protocols terminologies and speci cations for the collection exchange storage and retrieval ofinformation associated with health care applications. lectures data collection and quality assurance data collection cleaning data managing change using data for care delivery coordination and quality improvement quality assurance security privacy. lectures clinical data introduction medical digital dataformatsandexchange medical imageformatssuch as dicom in the context of health informatics. lectures informatics information retrieval bioinformatics usage of informatics in genomics and otheraspects of molecular biology patient case history analytics applications in public health ethical issue in health informatics. lectures medical diagnostic decision support probabilisticapproaches clinical scores logicalapproaches expert system inference engines case studies. lectures digital healthcare telemedicine mobile for health public health lectures text books . hoyt r. e. yoshihashi a. k. . health informatics practical guide forhealthcare and information technology professionals. lulu. com . hersh w. r. hoyt r. e. . health informatics practical guide seventh edition. lulu.com reference material . landais p. boudemaghe t. suehs c. dedet g. lebihan benjamin c. venot a. ... quantin c. . medical informatics e health fundamentals and applications. . healthcare data standards data collection and quality assurance computer aided diagnosis medical image analysis techniques self learning materialhealth informatics specialization coursera online level elective course course title high level synthesis course no. cs ee xxdepartment cse ee structure l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech ph.d type electiveprerequisite basic knowledge of digital circuits antirequisite objectivesto provide an introduction to high level synthesis of digital circuits and electronicdesign automation. to explain the hls design ow circuit logic rtl algorithm systems. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability in design digital circuits logic synthesis optimization andtechnology mapping. design veri cationuse different tools like c to silicon autopilot from autoesl synopsis for logic synthesis contentsintroduction basic overview of the vlsi design ow design abstractions lectures digital sub system design logic circuits adders multipliers alu lectures hdl language system c lectures synthesis scheduling allocation binding lectures rtl synthesis retiming fsm encoding combinational logic optimization and technologymapping lectures veri cation design vs veri cation types of veri cationat each step of asic design flow functional power gate level simulation gls uvm veri cation planning and designing atest bench lectures chip architectures full custom standard cells andfpga lectures synthesis tool c to silicon autopilot from autoesl lectures overview of layout synthesis topics placement androuting. chip synthesis. lectures reference books . m. fingeroff high level synthesis blue book xlibris. . g. de micheli synthesis and optimization of digital circuits mcgraw hill. . s. kang y. leblebici mos digital integrated circuits analysis and design wcb mcgrawhill rd edition. level elective course course title information retrieval course no. csl xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite prml introduction to ml antirequisite none objectivesinformationretrieval coversthetasksof indexing searching andrecallingdata particularlytext or other unstructured forms. it has an important role to play in a large number ofapplications viz. digital libraries o ce automation internet and e commerce. theaimofthecourseistostudytheoretical aspectsaswell asimplementationissuesofclassical andmodern retrieval problems. learning outcomesthe students are expected to learn and gather expertise in . the underlying technologies of modern information retrieval system . developing new search engines with high search accuracy contentsintroduction to information retrieval the natureof unstructured and semi structuredtext inverted index and boolean queries. lectures search engine architecture basic building blocksof a modern search engine system webcrawler basictext analysis techniques inverted index query processing search result interface semanticsearch using ontology lectures retrieval models boolean vector space tfidf okapi probabilistic language modeling latentsemantic indexing vector space scoring the cosine measure e ciency considerations document length normalization relevance feedback and query expansion rocchio ontological models lectures performance evaluation evaluating search engines user happiness precision recall f measure creating test collections kappa measure interjudge agreement. lectures text categorization and filtering introduction totext classi cation naive bayes model spam ltering vector space classi cation using hyperplanes centroids k nearestneighbors support vector machine classi ers kernel functions boosting. lectures text clustering clustering versus classi cation partitioning methods k meansclustering gaussian mixture model hierarchical agglomerative clustering clusteringterms using documents. lectures advanced topics summarization topic detection andtracking personalization question answering cross language information retrieval lectures web information retrieval hypertext web crawling search engines ranking link analysis pagerank hits. lectures retrieving structured documents xml retrieval semanticweb lectures textbooks . c.d. manning p. raghavan h. schuetze introduction to informationretrieval cambridge university press. . b. croft d. metzler t. strohman search engines information retrievalin practice pearson education. . b. ricardo b. ribeiro neto modern information retrieval addison wesley ndedition. level elective course title introduction to ar and vr number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite computer graphics antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . discusses such issues focusing upon the human element of ar and vr . explain the hardware and software related issues related to ar and vr learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . explain perceptual concepts governing augmented reality and virtual reality . identify and solve the issues of various augmented reality and virtual reality frameworks . design immersive experience using ar and vr software contents fractal introduction de nition of x r ar vr mr modern experiences historical perspective hardware sensors displays software virtual world generator game engines lectures geometry of visual world geometric modeling transforming rigid bodies yaw pitch roll axis angle representation quaternions d rotation inverses andconversions homogeneoustransforms transformstodisplays look at andeyetransform canonical viewandperspectivetransform viewport transforms lectures fractal light and optics interpretation of light re ection optical systems lectures visual perception photoreceptors eyeandvision motion depthperception frameratesanddisplays lectures tracking orientation tilt drift yaw lighthouse approach lectures fractal head mounted display optics inertial measurement units orientation tracking with imus panoramic imaging and cinematic vr audio lectures frontiers touch haptics taste smell robotic interfaces telepresence brain machineinterfaces lectures textbook . shirley m. fundamentals of computer graphics th edition crc press . lavalle virtual reality cambridge universitypress . schmalstieg d and hollerer t. . augmented reality principles practice pearson education india reference books . jerald j. thevrbook human centereddesignforvirtual reality morgan claypool . mather g. foundationsof sensationandperception nd edition psychologypress . shirley p. ashikhmin m. marschner s. and peters a.k. fundamentals of computergraphics rd edition crc press . bowman d.a. kruijff e. laviola j.j. and poupyrev i. d user interfaces theory and practice ndedition addison wesley professional self learning material . steven m. lavalle video lectures level elective course title introduction to blockchain course no. csl xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd. type electiveprerequisite cryptography cryptography andnetwork security antirequisite blockchain objectivesthe instructor will explain how blockchain technology worksintegrate blockchain technology into the current business processes to make them secure learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to understand what and why of blockchainexplore major components of blockchain and identify a use case for ablockchain application create their own blockchain network application contentsintroduction to blockchain digital trust asset transactions distributed ledger technology types of network components of blockchain cryptography ledgers consensus smartcontracts . lectures pki and cryptography private keys public keys hashing digital signature. lectures consensus byzantine fault proof of work proof ofstake. lectures cryptocurrency bitcoin creation and economy limitedsupply and de ation hacks ethereumconcept and ethereum classic. lectures hyperledger fabric hyperledger architecture membership blockchain transaction chaincode hyperledgerfabric features of hyperledger fabric demo. lectures blockchain applications building on the blockchain ethereum interaction smart contractand token fungible non fungible languages blockchain as a service. lectures textbooka. bahga v. madisetti blockchain applications a hands on approach vpt. self learning material . m. swan blockchain blueprint for a new economy o reilly media. . r. wattenhofer the science of the blockchain createspace independentpublishing platform. . i. bashir mastering blockchain packt publishing ltd. . k.e. levy book smart not street smart blockchain based smart contracts and thesocial workings of law engaging science technology and society vol. pp. . preparatory course materialmit online blockchain course learn blockchain technology level elective course course title introduction to wireless ad hoc networks course no. cs xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech mtech phd type electivepre requisites computer networks antirequisite none objectivesthe course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the wide applicability ofwireless ad hoc networks and their associated design issues and challenges.it also sheds light on protocol design mainly at the mac layer. learning outcomesat the end of this course students would be able to appreciate the mechanisms andinterventions required at different levels to make wireless ad hoc networks work in practice.they would be able to explain different mac protocols and their issues.students would also be able to contrast transport layer design issues arising out of mobility with the conventional tcp. contentsintroduction to wireless ad hoc networks overviewabout mobile ad hoc networks manets vehicular ad hoc networks vanets wireless sensor networks wsns and wireless meshnetworks wmns . lectures physical layer modulation techniques channel models case study of . a phy. lectures link layer single hop mac protocols multi hop macprotocols error correcting codes. lectures network layer mobile ip distributed wireless routingalgorithms aodv dsdv dsr olsr routing metrics. lectures transport layer tcp over wireless transport level mobility management multihop transportprotocols. lectures introduction to g networks lectures low power wide area networks lpwan for iot lorawan nb iot sigfox. lectures personal area networks bluetooth. lectures future trends in wireless networks . ax . ay mm wave wifi. lectures noteplease note that the course material would not be taken from a single book or resource. itwould be a combination of textbook material research papers and other sources. textbooksw. stallings wireless communications networks pearson education india ndedition.t.s. rappaport wireless communications principles and practice prentice hall ndedition. reference booksc.s.r. murthy b.s. manoj ad hoc wireless networks architectures and protocols pearson.g. aggelou mobile ad hoc networks from wireless lans to g networks mcgraw hillprofessional.s. basagni m. conti s. giordano i. stojmenovic eds. mobile ad hoc networking john wiley .a. goldsmith wireless communications cambridge university press.recent relevant rfcs internet drafts selected research papers from relevant venues mobicom mobisys sigcomm infocom ieee tmc acm mc r. self learning materials. mishra nptel iit kharagpur research papers. level elective course title machine learning in epidemiology number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all m.tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite machine learning prml iml antirequisite none objectivescourse focuses on advances in machine learning and its application to causal inference and predictionviatargeted learning which allows the use of machinelearning algorithms for prediction and estimatingso called causal parameters such as average treatment effects optimal treatment regimes etc. learning outcomeson completion of the course the students will have . ability to apply machine learning algorithms to prediction problems and estimate and deriveinference for the resulting t. . ability to use the ts of machine learning algorithms to estimate causal effects usingsimple substitution estimators. . knowledge of how the general methodology applies to goals of precision medicine. contentsintroduction introduction to epidemiology statistical methodologies in epidemiologic studies curse ofdimensionality in epidemiology relation between ml and epidemiology more on epidemiology. lectures prediction of observational epidemiology clinical decision support disease surveillance introduction totargeted machine learning. lectures causal inference understanding bias correlationvs. causality causal graph inference. lectures super learning parametric models data adaptivity performance measure on independent data customizable optimality criterion sequential super learning. lectures target update of machine learning tmle hal hal tmle c tmle tmle with clustering on linesuper learning on line targeted learning for time series. lectures case studies in epidemiology ebola corona etc. lectures future directions deep learning in clinical epidemiology recurrent unit neural networks to identifyindividuals at risk. lectures reference books . van der laan rose targeted learning in data science causal inference for complexlongitudinal studies springer . van der laan rose targeted learning in causal inference for observational andexperimental data springer reference articles . timothy l. wiemken robert r. kelley machine learning in epidemiology and healthoutcomes research annual review of public health . goldstein n. d. levasseur m. mcclure l. a. . on the convergence of epidemiology biostatistics and data science.harvard data sciencereview. . char ds shah nh magnus d. implementing machine learning in health care addressingethical challenges new england journal of medicine . . chiavegatto filho adp dos santos hg do nascimento cf massa k kawachi i. overachievingmunicipalities in public health a machine learning approach epidemiology . . other relevant articles level elective course title machine learning with big data number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite machine learning prml antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . provide an understanding of the role of big data in the real world scenarios . provide technical details about various algorithms and software hardware tools platformsrelated to big data learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . develop an understanding of big data in the modern context and independently work onproblems relating to big data . design and program e cient algorithms for big data from the perspective of a project contentsintroduction what is big data unreasonable effectivenessof data lecture streaming algorithms streaming naive bayes streamand sort lectures platforms for learning from big data mapreduce new software stack large scale file systemorganization lectures nearest neighbour search jaccardi similarity of sets similarity of documents locality sensitivehashing the stream data model lectures randomized methods clustering hashing sketching scalable stochastic gradient descent lectures frequent itemsets the market basket model a priori algorithm handling larger datasets in mainmemory limited pass algorithms counting frequent items in a stream lectures parameter servers introduction abstraction parametercachesynchronization asynchronousexecution model parallel examples lectures graph based methods lectures page rank topicsensitivepagerank approachestopagerankiteration linkspam semi supervisedlearning scalable link analysis models for recommendation systems social networks as graphs lectures large scale machine learning with cpus and gpus lectures textbook . leskovec j. rajaraman a. ullman j. mining of massive datasets nd edition cambridgeuniversity press . bekkerman r. bilenko m. langford j. scaling up machine learning cambridge universitypress reference books . research literature self learning material . department of machinelearning carnegiemellonuniversity machinelearningwithlargedatasetscourse . department of computer science university of california berkeley scalable machine learning . eth zurich data mining machine learning fromlarge datasets level elective course title medical image analysis number csl xxdepartment cse ai ds ee l t p c offered for btech mtech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite digital image processing computer vision machinelearning prml antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will provide an in depth understanding of classical and machine learning basedtechniques for medical image analysis. learning outcomesthe students will have ability to . interpret and analyse the images in a quantitative way. . apply the learned techniques for novel disease diagnosis and prognosis. contentsclassical approaches introduction to image processing and medical imaging modalities denoising and enhancement lectures tissue and cell segmentation clustering active contours and level sets based approaches lectures medical image alignment rigid and deformable registration lectures machine learning and deep learning approaches fundus image analysis retinal vessel segmentation lectures mri image analysis and segmentation d brain reconstruction from and mri slices and analysis lectures microscopic image analysis and interpretation lectures ultrasonography image analysis lectures x ray and ct image segmentation diagnosis and prognosis of various diseases lectures correlation between different medical imaging modalities and conversions augmenting clinicalmeasurements with medical imaging modalities for diseases diagnosis and prognosis lectures text books . prince j. l. links j. m. .medical imagingsignals and systems. upper saddle river nj pearson prentice hall. . suetens p. . fundamentals of medical imaging. cambridge university press. self learning material medical image processing by prof. jeff orchard at university of waterloo level elective course course title mobile and pervasive computing course no. cs xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b. tech and m. tech type electivepre requisites computer networks antirequisite none objectives .explain necessary concepts to understand challenges in developing applications for mobile devices when contrasted with that of a general purpose computer. .introduce mechanisms employed by different cellular technologies particularly g and contrast themwith each other. learning outcomesat the end of this course students would be able to .describe the working principles of various cellular technologies as well as appreciate the associatedchallenges. .compare contrast various aspects of mobile and pervasive computing viz. localization sensing security and privacy concerns application development etc. .implement the theoretical concepts into practical scenarios.. contentsoverview of wireless systems infrastructure basedvs ad hoc wireless lans cellular systems sensornetworks bluetooth wifi wimax. lectures medium access link adaptation routing protocols. lectures mobility and handoff management link layer mobilitymechanisms location management protocols network layer mobility mechanisms macro and micro mobility protocols handoff management protocols. lectures cellular networks lte and g overview g architecture ran and dynamic cran mobility managementand network slicing in g. lectures pervasive computing principles characteristics pervasive devices smart sensors and actuators contextcommunication and access services. lectures context aware sensor networks open protocols sdp jini slp upnp syncml framework context awaremobile services context aware security. lectures energy e ciency localization gps wifi gsm security lectures recent advances in wearable devices lectures body area networks ban lectures textbooks . i. stojmenovic handbook of wireless networks and mobile and pervasive computing wiley. . s. loke context aware pervasive systems architectures for a new breed of applications crc press. . a. osseiran j.f. monserrat p. marsch eds. g mobile and wireless communicationstechnology cambridge university press .reference books . r. kamal mobile and pervasive computing oxford university press rd edition. . l. merk m. niclous principles of mobile and pervasive computing dreamtech press nd edition. . g. aggelou mobile ad hoc networks from wireless lans to g networks mcgraw hillprofessional.self learning material . j.j. drake z. lanier c. mulliner p.o. fora s.a. ridley g. wicherski androidhacker s handbook john wiley st edition. . p. singh nptel iiit delhi relevant research papers from mobisys sensys mc r mobicom and ubicomp. level elective course course title g mobile networks course no. cs xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech phd type electivepre requisites computer networks introduction to wireless adhoc networks antirequisite none objectivesthe course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the forthcoming g technology andits ability to transform the world for the better. learning outcomesstudents would be able to appreciate the increasing role that sdns play in g systems and beyond. contents g lte networks introduction overview and architecture. lectures from g to g why when and how lecture g overview understanding gpp ngmn g architectureand design objective g spectrumrequirements sdn in the g context. lectures g core g ran dynamic cran virtual network functionsin the g core g nr logical architecture g protocol stack. lectures g signalling millimeter wave propagation distributedmassive mimo principle g ultra dense cellularnetworks g coordinated multi point. lectures g mobile edge computing fog computing lectures g applications healthcare transportation smartcities ar vr. lectures g vs mm wave wi a comparison. lectures india s g policy and vision lecture the g vision lecture paper discussions lectures noteplease note that the course material would not be based on a single book or resource. it would be acombination of textbook material research papers and other sources from the internet. textbooksa. osseiran j.f. monserrat p. marsch eds. g mobile and wirelesscommunications technology cambridge university press. reference booksa. elnashar m.a. el saidny m. sherif design deployment and performance of g lte networks a practical approach john wiley sons. self learning materialrelevant research papers. level elective course title natural language understanding number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite deep learning antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . to provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms related to natural languageunderstanding . impart working expertise by introducing practical problems. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . formulate natural language understanding tasks . design and implement basic applications of nlu contentstraditional nlu introduction to nlu motivation morphology parts of speech language models wordsensedisambiguation anaphoraresolution basicsofsupervisedandsemi supervisedlearningfornlu hiddenmarkovmodelsfor languagemodeling emalgorithm structuredprediction dependencyparsing topic models semantic parsing sentiment analysis. lectures deep learning for nlu intro to neural nlu word vector representations neural networks andbackpropagation for namedentity recognition practical tips gradient checks over tting regularization activationfunctions recurrentneural networks forlanguagemodelingandothertasks grusandlstms for machine translation recursive neural networks for parsing convolutional neural networks forsentenceclassi cation questionansweringanddialoguesystem graphneural networkfor nlu naturallanguage generation analysis and interpretability of neural nlu. lectures knowledge graphs knowledge graph embedding techniques inference on knowledge graphs. lectures textbook . c. manning h. schu tze foundationsofstatistical natural languageprocessing mitpress. . d. jurafsky j.h. martin speech and language processing an introduction to naturallanguage processing computational linguistics and speech recognition rd edition draft . reference books . e. bender linguistic fundamentals for nlp morgan claypool publishers.. . j. allen natural language understanding pearson education . . research literature. self learning material . deep learning for nlp level elective course title neuromorphic computing and design number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite arti cial intelligence prml introduction to ml antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . provide information about neuroscienti c progress towards reverse engineering the brain . provide essentials on key hardware building blocks system level vlsi design and practicalreal world applications of neuromorphic systems learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . view neuromorphic computing as a computer architecture research problem . perform software and hardware implementation of basic biological neural circuits contentscsl xx introduction to neuromorphic engineering foundational concepts introduction to neuromorphic engineering neuroanatomy of human brain signaling and operation of biological neurons neuron models lif if hh synapses and plasticityrules spike time dependent plasticity stdp biological neural circuits non vonneumanncomputingapproach learning rules retina cochlea lectures csl xx neuromorphic computing neuromorphic computing spiking neural networks snn advanced nanodevices for neuronimplementation synaptic emulation non volatile memory nvm flash rram memristors cnt case study on intel s loihi neuromorphic chip lectures csl xx neuromorphic hardware implementation hardware implementation electronic synapses digital analog neuromorphic vlsi hardwareimplementation of neuron circuits hardware implementation of synaptic and learning circuits synaptic programming methodology optimization lectures textbook . liu s.c. analog vlsi circuits and principles mit press. . kozma r. advances in neuromorphicmemristor science springer. . kandel e. principles of neural science mcgraw hill. level elective course title parameterized complexity number cs xxxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite algorithm design and analysis antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will the objective of the course is to introduce a technique to deal with np hard problems learning outcomeslearn a new set of techniques to cope with np hard problems. identify novel and signi cant openresearch questions in the eld. contentsintroduction to parameterized complexity. lecture basic techniques to design parameterized algorithms bounded search tree iterative compression randomized method. lectures kernelization greedy based kernels matching based kernels sun ower lemma crown decomposition expansion lemma. lectures parameterized intractability. lectures textbooks . m. cygan f. fomin l. kowalik d. lokshtanov d. marx m. pilipczuk m. pilipczuk s.saurabh parameterized algorithms springer. . f. fomin d. lokshtanov s. saurabh m. zehavi kernelization theory of parameterizedpreprocessing cambridge university press. self learning material . level elective course title principles of biological vision and applications number csl department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will provide an account of various biological perceptions and cognitive processes.computational models for such processesexamples of machine vision applications with such computational models. learning outcomeson completion of the course the students are expected to have the ability to appreciate the principles of biological perception and cognition.apply computational models for perception and cognition processes of biological vision in variousmachine vision tasks. contents fractal lectures introduction perception reasoning and cognition roles of knowledge memory and learning. lectures eye and early vision lateral inhibition convolution detection of oriented edges color texture andmotion perceptions peripheral vision. lectures reasoning systems deductive abductive and inductivereasoning statistical property of nature bayesian framework of reasoning bayesian networks parameter estimation on complexity of modelsand prior probabilities information integration hierarchical bayesian models and inductivegeneralization. lectures fractal lectures late vision depth perception perceptual grouping foreground background separation multi stability models for object recognition hierarchical models visual quality and aesthetics. lectures visual attention cognitive information theoretic bayesian context basedandobject basedattentionmodels evaluation of attention models. lectures introductiontocognitivearchitectures activevision perceive interpret act cycles modelingcognitionprocesses roles of short term and long term memory review of star architecture. lectures fractal lectures knowledge representation and learning role of knowledge in visual interpretation memory knowledge and learning short termand long termmemory structured and unstructured knowledge semantic networks frame based representation symbol grounding problem perceptual knowledge uni edframeworkfor conceptual andperceptual knowledge learninginknowledge basedsystems. lectures neural networks for vision introduction to neural network cnnfor image classi cation and objectdetection knowledge representation in neural networks rnnand life long learning lstm recurrentattention models reinforcement learning meta learning and multi task learning knowledge infusedlearning graph networks. lectures applications in machine vision tasks computational photography digital heritage social robots smartcontent delivery and re purposing. lectures textbookh. ghosh in press expected jun jul computational models for cognitive vision wiley ieeepress. reference materialresearch literature to be announced in class. level elective course course title randomized algorithms course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech m. tech ph.d. type bouquet electiveprerequisite design and analysis of algorithms probability statistics and stochastic processes antirequisite none objectivesthis course presents basic concepts in the design and analysis of randomized algorithms. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . understand several of the main thrusts of work in randomized algorithms. . read current research publications in the area. . use randomized algorithm techniques for real world problems. contentstools and techniques basic probability theory randomizedcomplexity classes game theoretictechniques markov chebyshev and moment inequalities limited independence tail inequalities and thechernoffbound conditional expectation the probabilisticmethod markov chains and random walks algebraic techniques probability ampli cation and derandomization. lectures applications sorting and searching data structures combinatorial optimization and graph algorithms geometric algorithms and linear programming approximation and counting problems parallel anddistributed algorithms online algorithms. lectures text booksr. motwani p. raghavan randomized algorithms cambridge university press st edition. reference booksm. mitzenmacher e. upfal probability and computing randomized algorithms andprobabilistic analysis cambridge university press nd edition.w. feller an introduction to probability theory and its applications volumes i and ii john wiley nd edition.p. billingsley probability and measure john wiley. self learning level elective course title resource constrained ai number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite prml introduction to machine learning antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . explain the challenges of implementing ai and machine learning algorithms on devices withmemory and power constraints . provide methods to reduce computational complexity of ai techniques learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . understand the constraints of implementing ai algorithms on limited memory devices . design anddeveloptechniquestoreduceinferencetimememoryfootprint of machinelearningmodels contentsintroduction overview and motivation challenges of resource constrained ai why ai on edge lectures edgecomputing edgedevicesandtheirlimitations edgeandfogcomputing distributedcomputing communication links communication overhead in iot devices lectures monitoring prediction accuracy numeric accuracy precision memory footprints computationalcomplexity of ai models lectures memory optimization of models kilobyte size models oating point v s xed point seedot lectures edge ai resource e cient knn svmand deeplearningmodels toeplitzmatrix bonsai protonn emi rnn fastrnn fastgrnn lectures current trends and future hardware accelerators for edge ai vision processing unit vpu streaminghybridarchitecturevector engine shave intel smovidiusneural computestick ncs open neural network exchange onnx future trends lectures laboratory experimentsimplementation of bonsai cnn training using seedot language etc. textbook . alippi c. intelligence for embedded systems a methodological approach springer. preparatory course material . edgeml by microsoft ncsdk by intel level elective course course title security and its applications course no. cs xxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for m.tech. phd type compulsoryprerequisite computer networks anti requisite cybersecurity objectives . providethefundamental principlesof accesscontrol modelsandtechniques authenticationandsecure system design . introduce a strong understanding of different cryptographic protocols and techniques and beable to use them . provide methods for authentication access control intrusion detection and preventionlearning outcomes . understand cryptography and network security concepts and application . identify and investigate network security threat . analyze and design network security protocols contents introduction to cyber security internet governance challenges and constraints cyber threats. lectures cyber security vulnerabilities and cyber security safeguards cyber security vulnerabilities safeguards accesscontrol authentication biometrics deception denial of servicefilters ethical hacking firewalls response scanning security policy threat management. lectures cryptography shannon s approach to cryptography measures of security perfect secrecy de nition ofentropy one timepad symmetrickey cryptography cryptographichashfunctions authentication publickey cryptosystems key distribution and key agreement protocols lectures websecurity basicsecurityforhttpapplicationsandservices basicsecurityforsoapservices identitymanagement and web services authorization patterns security considerations challenges. lectures network security tcp ip threats the ipsec protocol the ssl and tlsprotocols firewallsandvirtualprivatenetworks vpns electronicmail security worms ddosattacks bgbandsecurity considerations lectures intrusion detection and prevention intrusion detectionand prevention techniques anti malware software security information management network session analysis system integrity validation. lectures cyber physical security iot security sensor actuatornetwork security lectures blockchain introductiontoblockchain blockchainarchitectureanddesign consensus byzantinefault proof of work proof of stake permissioned blockchains components of blockchain lectures text book . stallings w. . cryptography and network security e. pearson education india . douglas r. stinson maura b. paterson . cryptography theory and practice. e chapmanand hall crc reference books . mao w. . modern cryptography theory and practice. pearson education india . p eeger c. p. p eeger s. l. . security in computing. e prentice hall professionaltechnical . reference . goldreich o. . foundations of cryptography volume basic applications. cambridgeuniversity press . forouzan b. a. . cryptography network security. e mcgraw hill inc. supplementary resources . network and computer security mit opencourseware cryptography i coursera stanford university level elective course title social computing number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech ph.d type electiveprerequisite data structure and algorithms antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce the fundamental and current challenges in social computing. . explain how to design social computing systems to be effective and responsible. learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to . explore social computing systems get experience with social data analyses and focus ondesign and evaluation of a social software as their nal project for the course. . engage in the creation of new computationally mediated social environments. contentsintroduction and overview social software introduction different types of social software like blogging microblogging q a forum wiki etc. lectures social information processing tagging social navigation social search social bots lectures group collaboration wikis and wikipedia computersupported collaboration tools content sharing open source software development lectures recommender systems content based collaborative ltering challenges of social informationprocessing lectures social data analysis visualization sense making apis facebook wikipedia twitter lectures social capital de nitions and measures social capital and social networks role of onlinecommunities on social capital lectures challenges of online communities dealing with newcomers under contribution problem encouragingcontributions to online communities strategies supported by social science theories lectures social computing cities and society impact on physical and psychological well being connection toreal world equality of participation lectures text bookbecker howard s. writing for social scientists how to start and nish your thesis book orarticle. university of chicago press . reference books . bail et al . exposure to opposing views on social media can increase politicalpolarization. proceedings of the national academy of sciences . . dubois e. blank g. . the echo chamber is overstated the moderating effect of politicalinterest and diverse media. information communication society . . salganik m. j. watts d. j. . web based experiments for the study of collective socialdynamics in cultural markets. topics in cognitive science . self learning materialsocial computing iit kharagpur level elective course title social network analysis number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite social networks objectivesthe instructor will . introduce the social networks and the research areas therein. . provide with the mathematical foundation required for social network analysis . cover various concepts terminologies and algorithms related to social network analysis . conduct tutorial sessions to use networkx library in python for network analysis learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . understand the applications related to social networks . write program with social network datasets in python . formulate real world problems with any relational data set resembling social networks contentsintroduction and different types of networks lecture graph introduction adjacency matrix paths connectivity incidence matrix distance breadth first search directed graph lecture introduction to python and networkx lecture network measures centrality core cliques and clan strong and weakties homophily structuralbalance components lectures network data sets and structural analysis in python networkx pandas lectures networkmodels randomnetworks scalefreenetworks thebarab si albertmodel fuzzy granularsocial network lectures generate synthetic networks using network models in python networkx lectures game theory introduction modeling network tra c using games lectures information cascades small world phenomenon epidemics lectures implementing information diffusion algorithms in python networkx lectures community detection lectures implementing community detection algorithms in python networkx lectures link prediction lectures implementing link prediction algorithms in python networkx lectures evolving network and temporal networks lectures working with temporal network data lectures connected caveman problem link analysis and web search lectures implementing pagerank algorithm in python networkx network data science state of the art lectures textbook . networks crowds andmarkets reasoningaboutahighlyconnectedworld bydavideasleyandjon kleinberg cambridge university press sep pre publication draft available online. . networkscience byalbert laszlobarabasi cambridgeuniversitypress august freelyavailable under the creative commons licence. . networks by mark newman oxford university press nd edition sep reference books . complex and adaptive dynamical systems by claudius gros springer th edition . . the structure of complex networks theory and applications by ernesto estrada oxford universitypress . . exploratory social network analysis with pajek by wouter de nooy andrej mrvar and vladimirbatagelj cambridge university press rd edition july level elective course self learning material . level elective course title soft computing techniques course no. csl xxxdepartment computer science and engineering ai ds structure l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite none antirequisite none objectivesintroduction of different soft computing techniques their integration and applications. learning outcomesstudents are expected to have the ability to . identify and describe soft computing techniques . understand soft computing approaches in problem solving . formulate real world methodologies to data mining using soft computing tools contentsintroduction to soft computing difference betweensoft and hard computing fuzzy computing neural computing genetic algorithms associative memory adaptive resonance theory applications lectures fuzzy sets and fuzzy systems membership functions fuzzy operations fuzzy relations fuzzyproposition fuzzy implication fuzzi cation fuzzy inference fuzzy rule based systems defuzzi cation lectures genetic algorithm representation fitness function population operators selection mutation crossover others multi objective optimization problems lectures metaheuristic and swarmintelligence ant colony optimization beecolonyoptimization particleswarm optimization cuckoo search algorithm and others lectures rough sets knowledge representations rough decision making and data mining techniques granular computing lectures hybrid systems neuro fuzzysystems rough neural computing fuzzylogicandgeneticalgorithm gabasedbackpropagationnetworks fuzzyassociativememories hybridsystemsusingfuzzyandrough sets lectures bigdatachallengesandsoft computingopportunity uncertaintiesinbigdatainputs uncertaintiesin big data decisions lectures reference books . s.n. sivanandam s.n. deepa principles of soft computing wiley india rdedition. . f.o. karray c. de silva soft computing and intelligent systems design theory toolsand applications pearson education. . z. pawlak rough sets theoretical aspects of reasoning about data springernetherlands. self learning material .computer science and engineering noc introduction to soft computing computing it computing level elective course course title software de ned networks course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering electricalengineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type electivepre requisites computer networks antirequisite none objectivesthe course is intended to provide students with an understanding of the basics of sdns. learning outcomesthe course would enable students to look forward to sdn applications such as in datacenters and gsystems. contentsnetworking basics switching addressing routing lecture switching architecture data control and managementplanes hardware lookup forwarding rules dynamic forwarding tables autonomous switches and routers lectures sdn architectures plane separation simple deviceand centralized control network automationand virtualization openness sdn controllers sdn applications northbound and southbound apis lectures openflow switch controller interaction flow table packet matching actions and packetforwarding extensions and limitations lectures network function virtualization sdn vs. nfv opnfv inline network functions service creation andchaining nfv orchestration lectures emerging sdn models protocol models controller models application models sdn in datacenters multitenancy failure recovery sdn in internet exchange points ixps lectures data center networking in the context of sdn lectures noteplease note that the course material would not be based on a single book or resource. it would be acombination of textbook material research papers and other sources from the internet. textbooksp. goransson c. black t. culver software de ned networks a comprehensiveapproach. morgan kaufmann.k. gray t.d. nadeau network function virtualization morgan kaufmann. self learning materialrelevant research papers. level elective course course title software testing and quality assurance course no. cs xxxdepartment computer science and engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech m.tech ph.d. type electiveprerequisite software engineering antirequisite none objectivesthe course provides an introduction to the software engineering testing process describes the qualityassurance process and its role in software engineering. learning outcomesthe student will be able to work with various testing techniques methods and tools.the student will be able to demonstrate pro ciency in managing an industry scale software project tocustomer requirements.students will be able to describe the state of the art validation and veri cation techniques. contentsoverview and basics software quality quality assuranceand its context quality engineering. lectures software testing concepts issues and techniques testing process testing levels such as unit module subsystem system automatic and manual techniques for generating and validating test data static vs dynamic analysis functional testing web application testing reliability assessment. lectures quality assurance beyond testing defect preventionandprocessimprovement softwareinspection formal veri cation fault toleranceandfailurecontainment comparingqualityassurancetechniquesand activities. lectures quanti able quality improvement feedback loop andactivities for quanti able quality improvement quality model and measurements defect classi cation and analysis risk identi cation reliabilityengineering. lectures reference booksj. tian software quality engineering testing quality assurance and quanti able improvement wiley.p. ammann j. offutt introduction to software testing cambridge university press ndedition. level elective course course title speech understanding course no. csl xxdepartment cse ee structure l t p c offered for b.tech cse ai ds type electiveprerequisite prml iml ml antirequisite none objectives . to provide insights into fundamental concepts and algorithms related to speech processing andunderstanding . impart working expertise by introducing practical problems. learning outcomesstudents will have the ability to . build a speech recognition system . design and implement basic speech based application contentsintroduction to speech processing digitization and recording of speech signal review of digitalsignal processingconcepts humanspeechproduction acousticphoneticsandarticulatoryphonetics different categories speech sounds and location of sounds in the acoustic waveform andspectrograms. lectures speech recognition analysis and synthesis of pole zero speech models short time fouriertransform analysis ftviewandfilteringview synthesis filter banksummation fbs methodandola method features extraction extraction of fundamental frequency speech enhancement clustering and gaussian mixture models speaker recognition. lectures speech based applications hmm and neural models for speech recognition speech generation question answering dialogue systems other speech based applications. lectures text books . t.f. quatieri discrete time speech signal processing prentice hall new jersey. . d. jurafsky j.h. martin speech and language processing an introduction to naturallanguage processing computational linguistics and speech recognition rd edition draft . reference books . y. goldberg a primer on neural network models for natural language processing journal of arti cial intelligence research. . i. goodfellow y. bengio a. courville deep learning the mit press st edition. . s.k. patra digital signal processing a computer based approach mcgraw hill th edition. level elective course title sustainable computing number cs l xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech all m.tech type electiveprerequisite prml introduction to machine learning antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will describe ways to leverage networking sensing and computational strategies to help addresssustainability issues related to biodiversity climate environment urban design transportation buildingsand others.draw from professional experiences to ground all topics and discussions in real world examples. learning outcomesthe students will have the ability to gain an understanding of how data and computation can be used to identify root causes ofsustainability challenges create targeted strategies to address them engage stakeholders and trackand communicate progress.develop skills to design metrics and solutions for evaluation of progress towards sustainability goals.comprehend the power and shortcomings of data in communicating complex sustainability issues. contentsintroduction sdg goals sustainability metrics humanity and the environment sustainability dimensions of sustainable design sustainability metrics. lectures climate computational techniques for weather predictions models of climate variance. lectures biosphere species distribution modelling aggregatephenomena modelling ecosystem modelling animal identi cation case study green security games bird returns program. lectures health food water health medical informatics telemedicine poverty mapping food farmoptimization modelling for water distribution. lectures insuring impact with technology for education gender equality. lectures usability hci for assistive technologies. lectures green technology e waste. lectures sustainable energy systems energy constrained scheduling electricity demand renewable resourceprediction models for energy consumption smart grid. lectures it energy e ciency measure energy e ciency ofcomputer system components in sync with solutionframeworks energy consumption estimation of whole systems energy e ciency metrics sustainableresource management techniques for cloud computing edge fog computing high performancecomputing wearable computing internet of things iot and cyber physical systems sustainable datacenters. lectures text books . theis t. tomkin j. . sustainability a comprehensive foundation. openstax cnx. . issa t. isaias p. . sustainable design hci usability and environmental concerns.springer verlag london. . green sustainable computing part i ii. elsevier. reference material . gomes c. et al. . computational sustainability computing for a better world and asustainable future. communications of the acm . . sustainability metrics reading list reading list reading list level elective course title stream analytics number cs xxxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite introduction to machine learning prml antirequisite none objectivesprovide background on some of the important models algorithms and applications related to streamdata. learning outcomesability to understand and apply the practical and algorithmic aspects related to various topics of datastreams contentsintroduction stream and mining algorithms. lectures clustering massive data streams micro clusteringbased stream mining clustering evolving datastreams online micro cluster maintenance high dimensional projected stream clustering classi cation of data streams using micro clustering on demand stream classi cation applications of micro clustering. lectures classi cation methods in data streams ensemble basedclassi cation very fast decision trees on demand classi cation online information network. lectures distributed mining of data streams outlier and anomalydetection clustering frequent itemsetmining classi cation summarization. lectures change diagnosis algorithms in evolving data streams velocity density method clustering forcharacterizing stream evolution. lectures multidimensional analysis of data streams using stream cubes architecture for online analysis ofdata streams stream data cube computation performance study. lectures dimensionality reduction and forecasting on streams principal component analysis auto regressive models and recursive least squares tracking correlations and hidden variables. lectures text bookc.c. aggarwal ed. data stream models and algorithms kluwer academic publishers . level elective course title vehicular ad hoc networks vanets number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b. tech m.tech. and ph.d. type electiveprerequisite computer networks introductiontowirelessadhocnetworks antirequisite none objectivesthe instructor will . introduce the emerging technologies standards and applications in vehicularcommunication systems. . provide the design considerations and challenges of vehicle to infrastructure andvehicle to vehicle communications. theories such as vehicular mobility modeling andvehicular technologiesandstandardsfromthephysical tonetworklayerswill beintroducedinthecourse. examplesofemergingapplicationsofvehicularcommunicationsinintelligenttransportation systems will also be studied and discussed. learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . understand and describe the basic theories and principles technologies standards andsystemarchitecture of vehicular ad hocnetworks vanet or inter vehiclecommunicationnetworks. . analyze design andevaluatevehicularcommunicationplatformsforvariouskindsofsafetyand infotainment applications. contentsintroduction basic principles and challenges pastand ongoing vanet activities lectures cooperative vehicular safety applications enabling technologies cooperative systemarchitecture safety applications lectures vehicular mobility modeling randommodels owand tra c models behavioral models traceand survey based models joint transport and communication simulations lectures physical layer considerationsfor vehicular communications signal propagation dopplerspreadand its impact on ofdm systems lectures mac layer of vehicular communication networks proposed mac approaches and standards ieee . p lectures vanet routing protocols opportunistic packet forwarding topology based routing geographicrouting lectures emerging vanet applications limitations example applications communication paradigms message coding and composition data aggregation lectures standards and regulations regulations and standards dsrc protocol stack cellular v x lectures laboratory experimentsprogramming exercises using ns qualnet and java textbook . olariu s. weigle m. c. . vehicular networks fromtheory topractice. chapmanand hall crc . murthy c. s. r. . adhocwirelessnetworks architecturesandprotocols. pearsoneducation india reference books . emmelmann m. bochow b. kellum c. eds. . . vehicular networking automotive applications and beyond vol. . johnwiley sons . claudia campolo antonella molinaro riccardo scopigno . vehicular ad hocnetworks springer . hartenstein h. laberteaux k. .vanet vehicularapplications andinter networking technologies vol. . chichester wiley . sommer c. dressler f. .vehicular networking.cambridge university press level elective course . moustafa h. zhang y. . vehicular networks techniques standards andapplications. auerbach publications self learning material . center for autonomous intelligent networks and systems cains university ofcalifornia los angeles ucla level elective course title video processing course no. csl xxdepartment cse ee structure l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. ph.d. type electiveprerequisite linear algebra antirequisite none objectives . to make the students familiar with several issues and challenges involved in the task ofvideo processing . to enable students to formulate problems related to video processing and exploresolutions learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . address the challenging issues of video processing and to come with new solutions bytheir own . handle multi dimensional signals other than videos contentsdigital images and video human visual systems analogvideo digital video d video video quality lectures multi dimensional signals and systems multi dimensional signals multi dimensionalsystems multi dimensional transforms multi dimensional sampling theory lectures motion estimation camera models motion models motionestimation differential methods matching methods non linear optimization methods d motion and shape estimation lectures video segmentation and tracking basics of segmentation video based segmentationalgorithms change detection motion segmentation motion tracking performance evaluation lectures video filtering spatio temporal filtering video formatconversion multi frame noisefiltering multi frame restoration lectures video compression motion jpeg mpeg hevc shvc h. lectures modern topics in video processing ego centric videoprocessing degree video streaming video lectures textbooks . a.m. tekalp digital video processing prentice hall signal processing series ndedition. . a. bovik the essential guide to video processing academic press nd edition. reference books . e. maggio a. cavallaro video tracking theory and practice wiley and sons. . m. wohl the video handbook. . research literature level elective course course title virtualization and cloud computing course no. cs xxdepartment computer science engineering structure l t p c offered for b.tech type electiveprerequisite operating systems computer networks antirequisite none objectivesthis course will introduce fundamentals of virtualization and concepts frameworks andapplications in cloud computing to the audience learning outcomes . to understand various virtualization techniques and their features and limitations . to understand design and concepts of a cloud computing framework contentscloud computing concept de nition cloud typesand service deployment models. lectures virtualization concept de nition types of virtualization hardware virtualization full and paravirtualization hypervisors hardware assisted virtualization operating system levelvirtualization application virtualization lectures virtual and physical networking introduction vswitches virtual nics virtual networking virtuallan lectures storage virtualization introduction san nas versusstorage virtualization. lectures virtual machine management base virtual machine virtual cpus sockets cores memoryscaling up and scaling down usb support virtual disks live migration. security. lectures containers concept de nition docker containerversus virtualization portability remotedeployment lectures applications and case studies linux kvm virtualbox openstack. lectures text book .d.e. sarna implementing and developing cloud computing applications crc press. .b.s. sodhi topics in virtualization and cloud computing ropar pb india . reference bookb. furht a. escalante handbook of cloud computing vol. springer. level courses selected special topics cse and ai ds title selected topics in arti cial intelligence i number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite decided by the instructor objectivesthe instructor will . expose the students to the latest upcoming elds in the area of arti cial intelligence learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply the knowledge of recent topics to speci c research areas in the eld of arti cialintelligence contentsthetopiccloudsforthecourseincludecontemporarytopicsinarti cial intelligenceandmaybeupdated according to the instructor. textbookrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. self learning materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. preparatory course materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. level selected special topic title selected topics in arti cial intelligence ii number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite decided by the instructor objectivesthe instructor will . expose the students to the latest upcoming elds in the area of arti cial intelligence learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply the knowledge of recent topics to speci cresearchareasinthe eldof arti cialintelligence contentsthetopiccloudsfor thecourseincludecontemporarytopicsinarti cial intelligenceandmaybe updated according to the instructor. textbookrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. self learning materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. preparatory course materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. level selected special topic title selected topics in arti cial intelligence iii number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite decided by the instructor objectivesthe instructor will . expose the students to the latest upcoming elds in the area of arti cial intelligence learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply the knowledge of recent topics to speci c research areas in the eld of arti cialintelligence contentsthetopiccloudsfor thecourseincludecontemporary topicsinarti cial intelligenceandmaybeupdated according to the instructor. textbookrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. self learning materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. preparatory course materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. level selected special topic title selected topics in computer science i number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite decided by the instructor objectivesthe instructor will . expose the students to the latest upcoming elds in the area of computer science learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply the knowledge of recent topics to speci c research areas in the eld of computer science contentsthe topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in computer science and may beupdated according to the instructor. textbookrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. self learning materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. preparatory course materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. level selected special topictitle selected topics in computer science ii number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite decided by the instructor objectivesthe instructor will . expose the students to the latest upcoming elds in the area of computer science learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply the knowledge of recent topics to speci c research areas in the eld of computerscience contentsthe topic clouds for the course include contemporary topics in computer science andmay beupdated according to the instructor. textbookrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. self learning materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. preparatory course materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. level selected special topic title selected topics in computer science iii number csl xx department computer science and engineering l t p c offered for b.tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite decided by the instructor objectivesthe instructor will . expose the students to the latest upcoming elds in the area of computer science learning outcomesthe students are expected to have the ability to . apply the knowledge of recent topicstospeci cresearchareasinthe eldof computerscience contentsthetopiccloudsfor thecourseincludecontemporary topicsincomputerscienceandmaybeupdated according to the instructor. textbookrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. self learning materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. preparatory course materialrelevant textbook and or research papers to be announced by the instructor. level selected special topic title special topics in algorithms number cs xxxdepartment computer science l t p c offered for b. tech. m.tech. phd type electiveprerequisite algorithm design and analysis maths for computing antirequisite preferredknowledge none objectives . the objective of the course is to introduce several advanced algorithmic techniques. learning outcomesstudents will gain the ability to . learn a new set of techniques to cope with np hard problems. . identify novel and signi cant open research questions in the eld. contentsparameterized algorithms lectures introduction to parameterized complexity andbasics lectures branching lectures iterativecompression lectures kernelization lectures approximation algorithms lectures greedy algorithm load balancing centerselection problem set cover lectures the pricing method vertex cover linearprogramming and rounding an application to vertex cover knapsack lectures randomized algorithms lectures contention resolution global mincut randomvariables and expectations max sat approximation lectures color coding lectures exact exponential time algorithms lectures exactalgorithms for coloring sat directedfeedback arc set max cut monotone local search or some other topics of contemporaryinterest.streaming algorithms lectures introduction tostreaming algorithms and its applicationto some graph theoretic problems. textbooks . marek cygan fedor v. fomin lukasz kowalik daniel lokshtanov daniel marx marcinpilipczuk michal pilipczuk saket saurabh parameterizedalgorithms springer. . jon kleinberg eva tardos algorithm design pearson education st edition. . fedor v. fomin dieter kratsch exactexponential timealgorithms aneatcsseries springer. self learning material .

